
1. Phonology
1.1. Phonemic System
The Senak dialect has a simple system of five vowels, while the Zugdid-Samurzaqan
dialect has a sixth vowel, /ə/.
Vowel Chart
Front Central Back
High i u
o
Mid ɛ ə
a
Phonetically, none of the vowels of Mingrelian is canonical. i is a slightly lowered high front,
unrounded vowel. ε is generally lax, mid or high-mid, unrounded and is strongly retracted
relative to i; it is transcribed "e" hereafter. u is a relatively high, back, rounded vowel. o is highmid, back, and rounded; while a is advanced back or central, low, unrounded. /ə/ seems to be
phonetically mid, back, and unrounded; but the schwa symbol is used to represent it here, in
keeping with convention among Kartvelologists.2
In the Z-S dialect there are long vowels; but in Senak, with some subdialectal variation,
these have been lost historically. The long vowels are often analyzed as geminate vowels
(sequences of two identical vowels).
Vowels may combine with the glides w (from underlying u) or y to form diphthongs: ye,
ey, ew, etc.
Obstruents are of three PHONATION TYPES: voiced (Vd), voiceless (Vl), and voiceless
ejectives (Ej). Voiceless (non-ejective) stops are aspirated.
3
Consonant Chart
Vd Vl Ej Vd Vl Nas Liq Gli
Labio-labial b p p’ m
Labio-dental v
Apico-dental d t t’
Lamino-alveolar ʒ c c’ z s n r y
Lamino-postalveolar ǯ č č’ ž š l
Dorso-velar g k k’ ɣ x
Dorso-uvular q’
Glottal ʔ h
The stops b, p, p’ are bilabial. While the stops d, t, t’ are formed with the tip of the
tongue making a closure at the teeth or at the teeth and the forward part of the alveolar ridge, the
affricates ʒ, c, c’ are formed slightly further back, with the front of the tongue against the upper
part of the teeth and alveolar ridge or against the forward part of the alveolar ridge alone. The
affricates ǯ,č, č’ are formed still further back, with a larger portion of the tongue making closure.
The stops g, k, k’ are formed with the back of the tongue at the juncture of the hard and soft
palates.
r is a voiced alveolar trill (ZHGHENTI 1965). l is said to be more palatal than the l of
other Kartvelian languages. ZHGHENTI (1952:346) has noted that it involves a wider area of
closure than does the palatalized l of Russian; he has compared Mingrelian l to French l mouille,
which became [y] in the standard dialect. His palatograms reveal that it involves the laminal area
against the upper alveolar ridge and the front of the hard palate. n is formed with the laminal
area against the teeth and/or alveolar ridge.
The phoneme /v/ has two allophones: [v] and [w]; according to IMNADZE (1981:19),
these are in free variation. [Except as noted, analysis based on ZHGHENTI 1953 and
IMNADZE 1981.]
4

1.4.1. Vowels. Verbs may take up to five prefixes, and a number of rules apply to the vowels of
these morphemes. The morphemes that may precede the root are summarized in the table below
in terms of preradical slots.
Pre-Root Positions in the Finite Verb Form
 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0
Status PV Imp Person CV Root
 Dir- Loc prt prefix
ko- me- +no- (t)mV v- ava- go- +to- m- iga- do- +la- g- u-
+ša- o-
+c’o- e-
+k’o-
+da- 
8
Each of these slots is filled independently of the others, except that -3 can only be filled if -4 is
filled; elements within a slot are mutually exclusive. It is possible for any number of slots to be
filled, from zero to five. The morphemes in these slots are discussed further in §2.2.
The prefix in slot -4, usually called the preverb, is itself composed of two parts written
here joined with "+" (see §2.2.3 on the preverb); with few exceptions, each part of the preverb is
of the form CV. The prefixes that can occur in the slot immediately before a verb root (-1) are
vocalic, and those that immediately precede it (-2) are consonantal. Most other prefixes are of
the form CV. All prefixal vowels may optionally delete except the first and the last before the
root in a given verb form. Examples are given with their synchronically underlying form in
parentheses: vamc’mgadvine (va-mi+c’o-mo-g-a-dvine) ‘you (Sg) cannot put it in front’,
mišgaxune (mi+ša-g-a-xune) ‘you (Sg) can sit down’. The form mi+c’o-xe ‘s/he is sitting in
front’ cannot undergo deletion, however, because the only prefixal vowels are the first (i in mi+)
and the last before the root (o in +c’o), and these are specifically excluded from deletion. Note
that the consonant clusters that result from vowel deletions conform to the description given in
the Prefixal Consonant Sequence Schema.
The preverbs (in slot -4) are composed of a first part (me-, go-, or do-), which indicate
direction, and an optional second part, the local elements (no-, to-, la-, ša-, c’o-, k’o-, or da-).
The vowel of the first part obligatorily becomes i (and may delete under the conditions described
in the preceding paragraph) if it is followed by one of the local elements; for example, me-ɣala
‘taking thither’, but mi+to-ɣala (me+to-ɣala) ‘taking under’.
Any one of three morphemes may occupy slot -5: the affirmative ko-, the negative va-, or
ga-.
4 If the vowel of the prefix that follows this is i or e, and if this i or e vowel deletes
according to the rule above, the vowel of the morpheme in slot -5 may become e. For example,
we find gamk’olu or gemk’olu (ga-mi+k’o-lu) ‘s/he fell down here (vertical plane)’ vemc’oxe
(va-mi+c’o-xe) ‘s/he is not sitting in front’.
The only prefix that may occur in the third slot is the imperfectivizing prefix (§2.2.5).
According to GUDAVA and GAMQRELIDZE (1981:234, 240), this prefix is of the form (t)mV,
and its vowel is a copy of the vowel of the prefix that immediately precedes it, even if that vowel
is deleted by the vowel deletion rule discussed above. For example from the underlying form 
9
mi+la-mV-dvans ‘s/he places it inside’, we get the form milmadvans, and from va-mi+c’o-mVdvans ‘s/he does not place it in front’ is derived vamc’modvans.
When a prefix in slot -1 is immediately preceded by a prefix from slot -3, -4, or -5, all of
which have an underlying form ending in a vowel, two vowels are juxtaposed. The resulting
vowel cluster may be changed according to the following rules:
a-a → a e-a → ia o-a → a
a-i → e e-i → i o-i → i
a-u → (a)u e-u → (e)u o-u → u
a-o → a e-o → io o-o → a
a-e → e
The simplified vowel is optionally pronounced as a long vowel. In Z-S, which preserves vowel
length, the long vowel is the norm in such instances; in the Senak dialect, the vowel is usually
short. Examples of some of these combinations are the following, with the underlying form in
parentheses: milmadvine (mi+la-ma-a-dvine) ‘s/he can put it down inside’, gišmuč’aruns
(gi+ša-ma-u-č’aruns) ‘s/he writes it to him’, mic’madvine (mi+c’o-mo-a-dvine) ‘s/he can put it
in front’, več’are (va-i-č’are) ‘it cannot be written’, vač’arapu (va-o-č’arapu) ‘s/he did not cause
another to write it’. Vowel clusters arising from deletion (zero realization) of v- of slot -2
(described in §2.2.2) are resolved in the same way. [Analysis above is based closely on
GUDAVA and GAMQRELIDZE 1981:235-242, but some material is necessarily omitted.]
In vowel clusters involving i or u, this vowel may become non-syllabic; for example,
gewʒinank (from underlying ge-v-u-ʒinank, after intervocalic deletion of v) ‘I will add to it’
(GUDAVA 1969:110, ZHGHENTI 1953:52-53).
In the Z-S dialect, a synchronic rule causes morpheme-final u to become ə; this applies
infrequently in Senak. Compare Senak do-č’k’ir-u ‘s/he cut it’ with Z-S do-č’k’ir-ə. However,
application of this rule is blocked under conditions that are incompletely understood (but see
MARGVELASHVILI 1984:125-126).
Underlying vowels may delete in word-final position, even when the vowel is itself a
morpheme; for example, in the form gegnvoʔot ‘I threw it out’ (KHUBUA 1937:94, 33), the
final -i has been deleted, though it is the marker of the aorist. On the other hand, words that end 
10
in a consonant in underlying form may add a final vowel i, u, or ə; for example, in the form ʔvilən-c-ə (KIPSHIDZE 1914:18, 18), the final ə is epenthetic. The conditions under which these
two rules apply are incompletely understood.
1.4.2. Consonants
In §1.2 it was noted that the Homogeneity Principle requires that adjacent obstruents be
of the same phonation type: voiced, voiceless, or ejective. Regressive assimilation changes the
first of two obstruents, so that this principle is satisfied. The assimilating consonant changes in
phonation type only, retaining its point of articulation and manner of articulation. In declension
this rule applies when a consonant-final root is combined with the narrative case marker, -k (see
§2.1.1.1 on cases and declension): ɣeč-k ‘pig-Nar’, beside ɣeǯ-i ‘pig-Nom’; dut-k ‘head-Nar’,
beside dud-i ‘head-Nom’.
Several disparate rules apply to change consonant clusters that span a morpheme
boundary so that the cluster will satisfy the General Consonant Sequence Schema (§1.2). Since
the clusters *v-C and *g-C are non-canonical (except, in the second instance, where the C is v), a
group of rules applies to the person markers v-, g- of slot -2 (see §1.4.1) and is separately
discussed and illustrated in §2.2.2. Special rules are also given there for the acanonical cluster
m-C.
Since a cluster composed of two non-back (set b) consonants is non-canonical, in such a
sequence the first consonant deletes; this rule is referred to below as Non-Canonical Cluster
Simplification. This situation arises in declension with the dative case marker, -s. Examples
give the underlying form in parentheses: ɣe-s (ɣeǯ-s) ‘pig-Dat’, du-s (dud-s) ‘head-Dat’, k’o-s
(k’oč-s) ‘man-Dat), ɣoron-s (ɣoront-s) ‘God-Dat’.
Another way to resolve non-canonical clusters is to insert i between the root and the case
marker. Parallel to the forms of this word cited above, we have dud-i-k ‘head-Nar’, dud-i-s
‘head-Dat’. A partial paradigm of t’oronǯi ‘dove’ illustrates the application of these alternative
rules; underlying forms are in parentheses:
11
Nom t’oronǯ-i
Nar t’oronč-k // t’oronǯ-i-k (t’oronǯ-k)
Dat t’oron-s // t’oronǯ-i-s (t’oronǯ-s)
Apparently some such stems are being reanalyzed as containing this i, and now it can be found in
the narrative case forms even when there would be no violation of the Homogeneity Principle or
of the General Consonant Sequence Schema. An alternative, reanalyzed partial declension of
k’oci ‘man’ illustrates this, beside the older, still used forms.
Reanalyzed Older
Nom k’oči k’oč-i
Nar k’oči-k k’oč-k
Dat k’oči-s k’o-s
Bilabial consonants (m, b, p, p’) become n when they immediately precede any consonant
across a morpheme boundary. In declension this rule applies to the plural marker -ep, making it
-en before the narrative case marker -k and the dative -s, but not before the markers of other
cases, which all begin with a vowel. For example, we find k’oč-ep-i, k’oč-en-k, k’oč-en-s ‘manPL-Nom, -Nar, -Dat’. However, this rule does not apply consistently in all (sub)dialects in this
environment (see §2.1.1.2 for some details), and it apparently does not apply at all when its
conditions are met in the singular; for example, čxom-k ‘fish-Nar’. The rule also applies in
conjugation. With the third person singular subject marker -s, we find č’vin-s ‘it is raining’,
beside dočvimu ‘it rained’. The same rule affects the form of the series markers, a set of verbal
suffixes (see §2.2.5). For example, the series marker -am is realized as -an in the following
examples: mepč-an-k ‘I give it to another’, meč-an-s ‘s/he gives it to another’, mepč-an-t ‘we
give it to another’. Notice that this rule does not apply to the bilabial person markers (slot -2);
see §2.2.2.
Since l is not permitted in clusters at all, l becomes r when it immediately precedes any
consonant. This arises in the declension of l-final substantives; for example, tor-k ‘eye-Nar’, tors ‘eye-Dat’, beside tol-i ‘eye-Nom’. (In declension the rule applies optionally.) The rule also
applies to l-final verb roots followed by the ending -s (third person singular subject), -k (first or
second person singular subject), or -t (plural). For example, from the base meul we get the forms 
12
meur-s ‘s/he goes’, meur-k ‘I go’, meur-t ‘we go’. The phoneme l would also precede a
consonant in zero grade forms of ablauting verbs, and here too it becomes r; for example, we
find zero grade šurdun ‘s/he gets tired’ beside normal-grade šulada ‘getting tired’ (GUDAVA
1974:135, DANELIA 1980:171).
In the Z-S dialect, a productive rule causes s to become c whenever it is immediately
preceded by a consonant. The conditions for this rule are met in the dative case, where we find,
for example, ǯoɣor-c ‘dog-Dat’ (compare, Senak ǯoɣor-s), cxen-c ‘horse-Dat’, but dida-s
‘mother-Dat’, k’ot’o-s ‘crock-Dat’. The same rule applies in the third person singular subject
forms when the ending -s (see §2.2.2) would be juxtaposed with a stem-final consonant. For
example, we have č’arun-c ‘s/he writes it’ (compare, Senak č’arun-s), beside doč’ara-s ‘may
s/he write it’. [Analysis above in this subsection based on GUDAVA and GAMQRELIDZE
1981.]
As in other Kartvelian languages, r dissimilates to l when preceded at a distance by
another r. This occurs in word formation -- for example, iri-peli ‘nothing’, beside peri ‘thing,
kind’ (ZHGHENTI 1953:130-135) --, in the reduplication of expressives of noise, motion, or
light, such as dardali, sarsali, varvali, respectively (KOBALAVA 1979), and in the formation of
participles with the endings -er, -ir, -ar etc., as in ɣur-el-i ‘dead’, č’ar-il-i ‘written’, oč’ar-al-i ‘to
be written’ (DANELIA 1980:171). See §2.2.5 on this rule in verb inflection.
A rule that is among the most important in understanding Mingrelian morphology is that
which deletes n is word-final position. This rule deletes the morpheme -n, the third person
singular subject marker in forms in some paradigms of certain verb conjugations, and the final n
of the morphemes -an and -nan, the third person plural subject markers in certain paradigms (see
§2.2.2), as well as other word-final n’s. The presence of word-final n is confirmed in forms
where the verb is followed by an enclitic such as the question marker, for example xe-n-o sit3.Sg-Ques ‘is s/he sitting?’ (CHIKOBAVA 1936:97). (In the present article, most verb forms
cited in isolation show this -n, but forms used in sentence examples have the n deleted if
appropriate.)
13
2. Morphology
2.1. Substantives
2.1.1. Nouns
2.1.1.1. Case
Synchronically there are nine cases in Mingrelian: nominative -i, narrative -k, dative -s,
genitive -iš, allative -iša, ablative -iše, instrumental -it, designative -išo(t), adverbial -o(t).
(Nearly every case has variant names in the work of one or another specialist; the names used
here are ones commonly used.) After a noun stem ending in a vowel, certain changes are made
in the forms of these suffixes. Case markers with initial i, including the nominative, drop that
vowel after any stem-final vowel. The adverbial case has the form -o or -ot after stems ending in
consonants or the vowels ə (Z-S dialect) or u (Sen.), -t after other vowels. These possibilities are
illustrated in the paradigms of gur- ‘heart’, bircxa ‘fingernail’, and t’u ‘udder’.
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
gur-i
gur-k
gur-s
gur-iš
gur-iša
gur-iše
gur-it
gur-išo(t)
gur-o(t)
bircxa
bircxa-k
bircxa-s
bircxa-š
bircxa-ša
bircxa-še
bircxa-t
bircxa-šo(t)
bircxa-t
t’u
t’u-k
t’u-s
t’u-š
t’u-ša
t’u-še
t’u-t
t’u-šo(t)
t’u-o(t)
The nominative is the unmarked case and is referred to below as the BASE; ROOT or STEM
is used here to refer to the form with no affixes.
The dative form has several variants, including -c with consonant-final stems in the Z-S
dialect (for example, gur-c ‘heart-Dat’) and forms derived with Non-Canonical Cluster
Simplification (for example, k’os ‘man/Dat’, compare, k’oči ‘man/Nom’); see §1.4. 
14
There are three so-called emphatic vowels -- -i, -ə, and -u, which are found after the
markers of the narrative, dative, genitive, and instrumental cases, and occasionally with the
adverbial and designative. In the Sen. dialect, all three vowels occur, though only -i is found
with the genitive; for example, ɣvin-k-i ‘wine-Nar-Emph’, osur-iš-i ‘woman-Gen-Emph’,
k’oč-k-ə ‘man-Nar-Emph’, k’o-s-u ‘man-Dat-Emph’. In the Z-S dialect, -ə occurs, except in the
genitive, where -i is found; k’oč-k-ə ‘man-Nar-Emph’, tuma-s-ə ‘hair-Dat-Emph’ hava-t-ə ‘airInst-Emph’, k’ibir-iš-i ‘tooth-Gen-Emph’.
The emphatic vowels are obligatory when the case marker is followed by a postposition
or enclitic; for example, boš-en-k-i-ni (Sen.) ‘boy-Pl-Nar-Emph-Conj’, kvabi-s-i-a (Z-S) ‘potDat-Emph-Quot’, mudga-k-i-(r)en (Z-S) ‘something-Nar-Emph-is’. Note that in this position the
Z-S dialect uses the -i variant, even with those cases where it is not otherwise found. The
emphatic vowel is usual with a clause-final noun or a noun occurring immediately before a
conjuntion ‘and’ or ‘or’.
(1) mažira dɣas uc’uu raši-k-ə (Sen.; Kip. 33, 16)5
second day he/say steed-Nar-Emph
‘The next day the steed said’
(2) luri va miɣu dɣa-š-i do ser-it (Z-S; Khub. 321, 13)
sleep not I/have day-Gen-Emph and night-Inst
‘I do not have sleep day or night’
In other environments the emphatic vowel is optional (LOMTADZE 1976). Emphatic vowels
are used with pronouns, as well as with nouns. (After this section, the emphatic vowels are not
glossed in most examples.)
Functions of cases are described in sections §3.1 (genitive), §3.2.1 (nominative, narrative,
dative), and §3.2.3 (dative, allative, ablative, instrumental, designative, adverbial).
2.1.1.2. Number
Plurality is indicated with the suffix -ep immediately following the root; the plural noun
is then declined as other consonant stems are. In the narrative and dative forms the variants -em
15
(Z-S dialect) and -en (Sen.) are found. Root-final a deletes before the plural marker, and some
qualitative changes in root vowels are also recorded. Senak forms are illustrated here.
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
gur-ep-i
gur-en-k
gur-en-s
gur-ep-iš
gur-ep-iša
gur-ep-iše
gur-ep-it
gur-ep-išo(t)
gur-ep-o(t)
bircx-ep-i
bircx-en-k
bircx-en-s
bircx-ep-iš
bircx-ep-iša
bircx-ep-iše
bircx-ep-it
bircx-ep-išo(t)
bircx-ep-o(t)
t’u-ep-i
t’u-en-k
t’u-en-s
t’u-ep-iš
t’u-ep-iša
t’u-ep-iše
t’u-ep-it
t’u-ep-išo(t)
t’u-ep-o(t)
In Z-S we find instead gur-em-k ‘heart-Pl-Nar’, gur-em-s ‘heart-Pl-Dat’, etc. In both dialects
forms such as gur-ep-k and gur-ep-s are also found, as well as additional variants.
In the plurals of some nouns, l or y occurs between the root and the plural marker:
Singular
da
tu
ǯima
t’q’a
muma
Plural
da-l-ep-i, da-y-ep-i
tu-l-ep-i, tu-y-ep-i
ǯima-l-ep-i, ǯima-y-ep-i
t’q’a-l-ep-i, t’q’a-y-ep-i
muma-l-ep-i, muma-y-ep-i
‘sister’
‘suckling pig’
‘brother’
‘forest’
‘father’
(Data from KIPSHIDZE 1914:025-031, CHIKOBAVA 1936:44-48, 56, 62.)
2.1.2. Adjectives
Adjectives are declined like nouns; agreement is described below in §3.1.
16
2.1.3. Pronouns
2.1.3.1. Personal pronouns are indicated below, together with their declensions. These pronouns
do not ordinarily occur in the instrumental or adverbial cases.
Nom ma si mu
Nar ma si muk
Dat ma si mus
Gen čkimi skani muš
All čkimda skanda muša
Abl čkimde skande muše
Des čkimo(t) skano(t) mušo(t)
‘I’ ‘you/Sg’ ‘he, she, it’
Nom čki tkva munepi
Nar čki tkva munenk
Dat čki tkva munens
Gen čkini tkvani munepiši
All čkinda tkvanda munepiša
Abl čkinde tkvande munepiše
Des čkino(t) tkvano(t) munepišot
‘we’ ‘you/Pl’ ‘they’
The i of the root vowel in ‘we’ and in the oblique forms of ‘I’ is replaced by ə in the Z-S dialect.
The third person plural narrative and dative forms with em and ep are also attested (KIPSHIDZE
1914:039-041, CHIKOBAVA 1936:74-77).
2.1.3.2. Demonstratives
Mingrelian expresses a two-way opposition: tena ‘this’ - tina ‘that’. According to
KIPSHIDZE’s analysis, there are simple and complex pronouns, each with a full form and one or 
17
more shortened forms. The shortened forms of the simple pronoun tena ‘this’ are ena, te and e;
the corresponding full complex form is atena, with the shortened form ate. The shortened forms
of the simple pronoun tina ‘that’ are ina, ti, and i; the corresponding full complex form is etina,
with the shortened form eti.
The forms te, e, ti, i, ate, and eti occur together with a noun and do not decline or indicate
number; for example, (t)e k’oč-i, (t)e k’oč-iš(i), (t)e k’oč-ep-i ‘this man’, ate ʔude, ate ʔude-š(i),
ate ʔude-ep-i ‘this house’ (each given in nominative singular, genitive singular, and nominative
plural, respectively).
Declension of the remaining forms is given below.
‘this one’
Nom ena tena atena
Nar ek tek atek
Dat es tes ates
Gen eši teši ateši
All eša teša ateša
Abl eše teše ateše
Inst eti teti ateti
Des ešo(t) tešo(t) atešo(t)
Adv et tet atet
18
‘these’
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
enepi
enenk
enens
enepiši
enepiša
enepiše
enepiti
enepišot
enepo
tenepi
tenenk
tenens
tenepiši
tenepiša
tenepiše
tenepiti
tenepišot
tenepo
atenepi
atenenk
atenens
atenepiši
atenepiša
atenepiše
atenepiti
atenepišot
atenepo
‘that one’
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
ina
ik
is
iši
iša
iše
iti
išo(t)
it
tina
tik
tis
tiši
tiša
tiše
titi
tišo(t)
tit
etina
etik
etis
etiši
etiša
etiše
etiti
etišo(t)
etit
19
‘those’
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
inepi
inenk
inens
inepiši
inepiša
inepiše
inepiti
inepišo(t)
inepo
tinepi
tinenk
tinens
tinepiši
tinepiša
tinepiše
tinepiti
tinepišo(t)
tinepo
etinepi
etinenk
etinens
etinepiši
etinepiša
etinepiše
etinepiti
etinepišo(t)
etinepo
The demonstrative pronouns effectively function as third person pronouns, meaning ‘he, she, it’;
this is illustrated with examples cited by MARTIROSOVI 1964:144:
(3) tena ok’odə is-ə-ti (Kip. 17, 32)
this/Nom he/want that/Dat-Emph-too
‘That one also wanted this one’ or ‘S/he wanted it too.’
(4) geeč’opu tina (Kip. 21, 31)
he/take that/Nom
‘S/he took it (that one).’
(Data from KIPSHIDZE 1914:042-045, CHIKOBAVA 1936:78-82, MARTIROSOVI 1964:
142-144.)
Derived demonstratives include te-cali ‘this kind (of), such’, ti-cali ‘that kind (of), such’,
te-neri, ate-neri ‘this kind (of)’, ti-neri ‘that kind (of)’ e-peri, e-gvari ‘this kind (of)’ i-peri, igvari ‘that kind (of)’, ate-ǯgura, te-ǯgura, e-ǯgura ‘this kind (of)’, ti-ǯgura ‘that kind (of)’, atezəma, e-zəma, e-zma ‘this many, this much’, ti-zəma, izma ‘that many, that much’, te-sxi, e-sxi
‘this many, this much’, ti-sxi ‘that many, that much’. Each of these words may be used to
modify a head noun or may stand on its own.
20
(5) te-cali t’q’a-ša mitoprti ni! (Kip. 46, 7)
this-kind woods-in I/go Conj
‘when/if I went into this kind of woods’ or ‘...woods like this’
(6) ti-sxi kiidə (Kip. 37, 9)
that-much he/go
‘He went that much.’ (MARTIROSOVI 1964:156-159, 160)
2.1.3.3. Possessives
The genitive case forms of personal pronouns and demonstrative pronouns are used
without additional inflection to express possession; for example, ‘my’ does not have the narrative
case form: čkini ǯima-k mortua, my brother-Nar come-Quot ‘My brother came’ (Kip. 29, 20)
(KIPSHIDZE 1914:046, MARTIROSOVI 1964: 119).
2.1.3.4. Interrogative Pronouns
Declension of some of the important interrogative pronouns is illustrated below. Recall
that in Mingrelian n is deleted in word-final position; the morpheme-final n shows up, however,
when it is followed by a suffix or clitic.
Nom
Nar
Dat
Gen
All
Abl
Inst
Des
Adv
mi(n)
mik
mis
miš
miša
miše
mit
mišo(t)
mino(t),
 mit
‘who?’
mu(y)
muk
mus
muš
muša
muše
mut
mušo(t)
muot, moot,
 mot, mut
‘what?’
namu
namuk
namus, naməs
namuš
namuša
namuše
namut
namušo(t)
namuo,
 namut
‘which?’
21
The pronouns ‘who’ and ‘which’ have plural forms, min-ep-i ‘who Pl’, namun-ep-i ‘which Pl’;
these forms decline regularly. These plurals are infrequently used, and the pronoun ‘what’ has no
plural form at all.
Other interrogatives include mu-č’omi, mu-neri, mu-neeri, mu-peri ‘what kind (of)?’, musxi, mu-zuma, mu-zəma ‘how much, how many?’ (KIPSHIDZE 1914:047-048, CHIKOBAVA
1936:83-84, MARTIROSOVI 1964:194, 197, 343), and mu-žans ‘when’.
2.1.3.5. Relative Pronouns
The following relative pronouns are formed on the base of the interrogatives with the
addition of the marker ti, which otherwise occurs in the meaning ‘too, also’: mi-ti (mitə, mit)
‘who’, mu-ti (mutə, mutu, mut) ‘which’, namu-(ti) (namutə, namut) ‘which’, muzma-ti (muzma,
musxi) ‘as many, as much’ (MARTIROSOVI 1964:209, 355, ABESADZE 1965:231-238). Case
marking suffixes are added between the pronoun root and the relative marker, -ti; for example,
namu-kə-ti ‘which-Nar-Rel’, namu-si-t ‘which-Dat-Rel’, namu-še-ti ‘which-Abl-Rel’. The
pronoun namuti ‘which’ has a plural form, namunepiti, but this is not often used and seems to be
dying out (ABESADZE 1965:234). Relative clauses are frequently formed instead by other
means (see §3.9.3).
2.1.3.6. Indefinite
The non-specific indefinite pronouns are mitini (mitine, mintinee) ‘someone, anyone’,
mutuni ‘something, anything’, namutini, (namutine) ‘whichever, some, any’. The specific
indefinites are midga (midəga, migida, midgeni, migdeni) ‘someone’, mudga (mudəga, mudiga,
mugida, mudgeni, mugdeni, mugideni) ‘something’, namudga ‘something, whichever’. All of
these are based on the interrogative pronouns described above. The marker ti, tu of the nonspecifics is said to be the same as d, di, də of the specifics, both related to the morpheme ti which
occurs in the relative pronouns and which otherwise means ‘too, also’. The marker ga is
particular to the specific indefinite, while ni, found in the non-specific and optionally in the
specifics, is said to be the same as the general subordinating conjunction of the same form. Note 
22
that the relative order of the formatives d(i) and ga may vary. Case markers are generally added
after all of these suffixes (KIPSHIDZE 1914:049, MARTIROSOVI 1964:243-245, 382-383).
2.1.3.7. Negative
Negative pronouns are likewise based on the interrogative: mi-t-a ‘no one’, mu-t-a
‘nothing’; they decline as a-stem nouns (KIPSHIDZE 1914:050, MARTIROSOVI 1964:255-256,
386-387).
2.1.3.8. Reciprocal
There are two reciprocal pronouns: arti-ani ‘each other’ is based upon art-i ‘one’, with ani
or iani ‘kind of, having (a property)’; case marking follows the whole, for example artian-sə
‘each other -Dat’. arti-mažir-a ‘one another’ has the same first element and adds mažir- ‘second’
and -a; case marking is added to the full base -- artimažira-s ‘one another -Dat’ (MARTIROSOVI
1964:218, 360).
2.1.3.9. Other Pronouns
The pronouns arʒo, arʒa ‘every, each, all’ and iri ‘all, everything’ are declined regularly
when used independently; when modifying another noun their form is invariant. ‘Other, another’
is expressed with the pronoun šxva; this has the plural šxv-ep-i, and declines regularly
(KIPSHIDZE 1914:049, MARTIROSOVI 1964:228-9, 230-231, 367, 370).
2.2. Verbs
In Mingrelian, as in other Kartvelian languages, verb paradigms, also called SCREEVES,
each express a particular tense, aspect, and mood. For example, the present screeve expresses
present tense, imperfective aspect, and indicative mood. Screeves are grouped in SERIES, on the
basis of shared morphological criteria; the screeves of a series also share certain syntactic and
semantic characteristics, which are discussed below.
23
2.2.1. Class
Verbs in Mingrelian are divided into four classes on the basis of morphological criteria,
discussed below.6 Correlated with the morphological characteristics are syntactic and semantic
characteristics; the correlations are imperfect, but represent generalizations about the language.
Class 1 verbs are characteristically transitive and active; that is, they are volitional,
controllable on the part of the subject. Examples are doč’aruns ‘s/he will write it’, bzimundi ‘I
was measuring it’, doʔvilu ‘s/he killed it’. Verbs that are transitive but inactive may also belong
to this class. Verbs of this class are defined by (1) a consonant-final stem in the present subseries,
resulting either from use of a bare consonant-final root as stem, or from suffixation of a series
marker of the form -(V)VC (see below), (2) use of the third person singular subject marker -s and
third plural -an in the present, and (3) a Series III stem composed of a preradical vowel i/(u)-, the
verb root, and the series marker -u.
Verbs of Class 2 are, with few exceptions, intransitive. They are generally inactive (not
controllable on the part of the subject), but there are exceptions to this generalization. Among
these inactive verbs, some are stative (for example, ren ‘s/he is’), others dynamic (for example,
iškvidunan ‘they are drowning’). Many verbs of this class are morphologically related to ones of
Class 1; for example, ʔordun ‘it rots’ is related to the Class 1 verb ʔoriduns ‘s/he makes it rot’,
which is not a causative, in spite of its English gloss. Additional examples of Class 2 verbs are
skidun ‘s/he stays’, doɣuru ‘s/he died’. Class 2 verbs are defined by the fact that they have (1) a
vowel-final stem in the present subseries, (2) third person singular subject marker -n and plural
-nan in the present, and (3) a Series III stem formed with the suffix -ere/ele.
Class 3 verbs are active and most are intransitive. Examples are ilaʔapu ‘s/he played’,
ibirs ‘s/he sings’, ingark ‘you are crying’, mušenan ‘they are working’. Class 3 verbs are defined
by (1) a consonant-final stem in the present subseries, (2) use of third person singular subject
marker -s and plural -an, and (3) a Series III stem composed of a preradical vowel i/(u)-, the verb
root, and the series marker -u. Note that by these morphological criteria, Classes 1 and 3 are not
distinct. For practical purposes, those that are transitive are treated as Class 1 and those that are
intransitive are treated as belonging to Class 3.7 
24
Class 4 verbs are stative and may be transitive or intransitive; they are affective verbs,
generally expressing perception or feeling. Examples are uʔors ‘s/he loves him/her’, ʔuns ‘s/he
has [an animate nominal]’, škirens ‘s/he is hungry’, gok’on ‘you want it’ moškurun ‘I am afraid of
it’, marčkilen ‘I hear it’. Class 4 verbs generally have the morphological characteristics listed
above for Class 2 verbs. However, Class 4 is quite irregular, and some verbs that are ordinarily
considered to be members of it lack one or more of the defining characteristics. For example, the
first three illustrations given above have consonant-final stems in the present subseries, with the
second and third using the series markers that are otherwise restricted to Classes 1 and 3
(HARRIS 1985:57, 401-403).
The second defining characteristic stated for each class is dependent upon the first; both
are presented in order to provide an additional possible criterion for excluding irregular verbs.
Summary of Morphological-Syntactic-Semantic Correlations
Class Morphological Syntactic Semantic
1 C-final stem Transitive Active
-s. -an Inversion in Telic
i + root + u- Series III
2 V-final stem Intransitive Inactive
-n, -nan No inversion Telic
root + ere/ele
3 C-final stem Intransitive Active
-s. -an Inversion in Atelic
i + root + u- Series III
4 V-final stem Inversion in all Stative
-n, -nan series Affective
Inversion and transitive/intransitive are discussed below in §2.2.6 and §2.2.7, respectively.
According to these criteria, some verbs that are in Class 2 in Georgian have cognates or
related words that are in Class 3 in Mingrelian. For example, the suppletive verb ‘go’ has all of
the characteristics of Class 3: (1) it has a consonant-final stem, -ur- (underlyingly -ul-), in the 
25
present subseries (me-ur-k ‘I am going’), (2) it uses the third person singular subject marker -s
and plural -an in the present screeve (me-ur-s ‘s/he is going’, me-ul-an ‘they are going’), and (3)
it has a Series III stem formed with i-, the root, and the series marker -u (me-g-i-rtum-u-n
‘evidently you have gone’). The verb also has the syntactic characteristics that correlate with
Class 3 (see §3.2), and appears also to have the semantic characteristics. While this verb seems to
have been partly regularized and fits this schema, there are some irregular verbs that cannot be
classified by the criteria set out here. For example, the suppletive verb ‘sit’ uses the root -
xod/xed- with the series marker -u (for example, komado-xod-u-n-ie ‘he will sit down beside it (he
said)’ or the root -x- with the series marker -e (for example, kimto-x-e-n ‘she is sitting beneath it’)
in Series I forms, satisfying the criteria of Class 2; but its Series III forms are composed of a
preradical vowel i/(u)-, the verb root -xun/xven-, and the series marker -u, which satisfy the
characteristics of Class 3 (for example, kugu-u-xun-u-nan ‘evidently they sat around it’). Thus,
this verb falls outside of the classificatory schema and is here considered irregular (examples from
MARGVELASHVILI 1982:94-96, 93, 98 and KIPSHIDZE 1914:27).
2.2.2. Agreement
The verb indicates person and number agreement with the subject, direct object, and
indirect object, although the markers for all three may not actually appear in the verb form.
Subject markers are summarized in the table below.
Subject Agreement
Person Singular Plural
1st v/b/p/p’--(k) v/b/p/p’--t
2nd --(k) --t
3rd --s/c,u/ə,n --an,es,nan
26
The distribution of the allomorphs of the agreement prefixes is determined by the principles that
govern consonant clusters, including the Prefixal Consonant Sequence Schema, the Homogeneity
Principle, and decessive structure (see §1.2). The allomorphs of the first person prefix are
distributed as follows: zero is found before u, v- precedes other vowels and bilabial consonants
(b, p, p’, m), b- occurs before other voiced consonants, p’- is used before other ejectives, and pprecedes other voiceless consonants. In all instances, v- is in free variation with the other
allomorph; often b-, which is apparently being generalized, is likewise possible. For example,
the following are all grammatical: p-tasunk, v-tasunk, b-tasunk ‘I sow it’.
Before a stem that begins with ʔ, the first person subject marker becomes p’, and the ʔ
deletes; for example, v-ʔidulenk → p’-idulenk ‘I buy it’.
Before a stem that begins with a sonorant (r, l, n) immediately followed by a vowel, the
first person subject marker is realized as v- or b-, in free variation. When a verb stem begins
with a consonant cluster consisting of one of these sonorants followed by a obstruent, the
realization of the first person subject marker is determined by homogeneity with the obstruent; it
becomes b- if the obstruent is voiced, p- if voiceless p’- if ejective. Each of these variants is in
free variation with v-. The allomorph m- is sometimes found before n.
The first person subject marker v-, when immediately preceding a root beginning with a
bilabial consonant and a vowel, may optionally metathesize with this CV sequence. When it
immediately precedes the verbal prefix i-, v- may likewise metathesize with this element. In
each instance, the form of the morpheme is determined by the consonant(s) it precedes,
according to the rules stated above. For example, v-mušenk ‘I work’ is optionally realized as mup-šenk, and v-i-rduk ‘I grow’ as i-v-rduk, i-b-rduk.
The suffix -k, not found in this form in any other Kartvelian language, occurs with first or
second person singular subjects, but only in the present, perfective future, and third evidential
screeves. -k is used with verbs of all classes. ASATIANI 1973 has recorded -r in place of -k as
a relic in some dialects.
The suffixes of the third person singular vary according to screeve and verb class. -n
occurs in the present, perfective future, first evidential, and third evidential screeves. When -n is
not followed by an enclitic, it deletes regularly, according to the rule described at the end of §1.4. 
27
(In the present article, verb forms cited in isolation show this -n, but forms used in sentence
examples have the n deleted if appropriate.) -u is used by all verbs in the imperfect, present
conditional, imperfective conditional, habitual, future conditional, aorist, conditional II, second
evidential, conditional III, fourth evidential, and conditional IV. -s occurs in the present, present
subjunctive, imperfective future, perfective future, future subjunctive, subjunctive II, subjunctive
III, and subjunctive IV. In the present and perfective future, -s occurs with verb stems ending in
a consonant (verbs of classes 1 and 3), while -n is used with those ending in a vowel (classes 2
and 4). The allomorph -c is a variant of -s when it immediately follows n or r, in the Z-S dialect
(see §1.4). In the same dialect, -u frequently becomes -ə.
First and second person plural subjects are marked with the person prefixes (zero for
second person) with the plural marker -t.
The third person plural subject suffix -es is found in the imperfect, present conditional,
imperfective conditional, habitual, future conditional, aorist, conditional II, second evidential,
conditional III, fourth evidential, and conditional IV. -nan occurs in the present, perfective
future, first evidential, and third evidential screeves. -an is used in the present, present
subjunctive, imperfective future, perfective future, future subjunctive II, subjunctive III, and
subjunctive IV. In the present and perfective future, -an is used with verb stems ending in a
consonant (verbs of classes 1 and 3), while -nan is found with verb stems ending in a vowel
(verbs of classes 2 and 4). The final n of both -an and -nan is deleted regularly unless it is
protected by an enclitic.
Object Agreement
Person Singular Plural
1st m/b/p/p’ -- m/b/p/p’ -- an,es,t
2nd g/r/0/ -- g/r/0/ -- an,es,t
3rd -- -- nan,es
The first person direct object marker m- is found before vowels (for example,
m-ič’aruns ‘s/he writes it for me’), with the other allomorphs distributed according to the
phonation type of the consonant that immediately follows. m- or b-, which is being
generalized, may optionally occur before any plosive. Before a single sonorant consonant 
28
(r, l, n, m), there is free variation of b- and m- (b-laxuns ‖ m-laxuns ‘s/he hits me’). Before a
cluster consisting of a sonorant and a following obstruent, the realization of the agreement
marker depends on the phonation type of the obstruent, as above, with m- an optional variant
for all types; for example, m-rčxunk, p-rčxunk ‘you wash me’. Before a bilabial, the first
person object is realized as m-; for example, m-poruns ‘it covers me’. Like the first person
subject marker, the first person object marker, when it immediately precedes a root
beginning with a bilabial consonant and a vowel, may optionally metathesize with this CV
sequence. The form it assumes is determined by the consonant(s) it precedes, according to
the rules give above. For example, m-poruns ‘it covers me’ may optionally become po-vruns or po-b-runs, both also ‘it covers me’. Thus, there is partial syncretism of the prefixal
markers of the first person subject and object; they remain distinct before vowels and, in
part, in their optional variants.
In the second person, g- occurs before vowels (g-ečiebun ‘s/he converses with you’)
but becomes r- before single obstruents (r-bons ‘s/he bathes you’); notice that this is an
example of a rule that makes an underlying noncanonical cluster accord with the General
Consonant Sequence Schema (see §1.2 and §1.4.2). Before a root beginning with r, the
person marker may be realized as g-, r- or zero, and before other sonorants it is r; for
example r-laxuns ‘s/he hits you’. Before a cluster of r and a following obstruent Ci, g- may
remain with any Ci or become k or k’ according to the phonation type of Ci; g-rduns ‘s/he
raises you’, g-rčxuns or k-rčxuns ‘s/he washes you’, g-rč’ip’uns or k’-rč’ip’uns ‘s/he
stretches you’. In the position V-__-i, the second person object marker may optionally
delete; when this occurs, the rules that would ordinarily simplify a vowel cluster (§1.4.1) do
not apply (va-g-iʔors or va-iʔors ‘you do not love him/her’). [Analysis and examples based
on GUDAVA AND GAMQRELIDZE 1981:219-224.]
The markers of direct and indirect objects are the same in Mingrelian, and both are
included in the table above. Although the verb may indicate subject, direct object, and
indirect object, generally speaking, no more than one non-null person/number prefix may
occur, and not more than one non-null person/number suffix. The rules of combining
affixes are incompletely reported in the literature, but ONIANI (1978:72) has noted that if 
29
the subject is first person and an object is second person, the prefix of the former does not
appear. Paradigms presented by CHIKOBAVA (1936:160-168) confirm this and show that
when a plural suffix is present, the suffix -k of the first and second person singular subject is
omitted; for example, ma r-zimun-t tkva I/Nom 2.Obj-measure-Pl you/Pl/Dat ‘I measure
you(Pl)’.
The plurality of first and second person objects is marked, but that of third person
objects is not. Inverted forms are an exception to this and are separately described below
(CHIKOBAVA 1936:98-99). The marker -t is used to indicate object plurality when both
subject and object are non-third person, while the markers -es and -an are used when either
subject or object or both are third person. -es is selected in those screeves where the third
person plural subject marker -es occurs, as listed above, -an is used in remaining screeves
(see KIPSHIDZE 1914:076-077, CHIKOBAVA 1936:160-168, ONIANAI 1978:192,
KIZIRIA 1982:140-141). Note that this set of rules prevents a situation arising in which -t
would be conditioned by one nominal and one of the other suffixes by another; thus there is
no need for a special convention designating which plural suffix has precedence.
The distribution of third person singular and plural markers is summarized by
screeves in the chart below.
Summary of Subject Markers by Screeve
Singular Plural Screeves
Set A -s -an present subjunctive
imperfective future
future subjunctive
subjunctive II
subjunctive III
subjunctive IV
Set B -u -es imperfect
present conditional
imperfective conditional
habitual
future conditional
aorist
30
conditional II
second evidential
conditional III
fourth evidential
conditional IV
Set C -n -nan first evidential
third evidential
Set A/C -s/-n -an/-nan present
perfective future
Each of the sets also contains the first and second person markers described above; these
sets are referred to below by the designation given them in the left-hand column.
2.2.3. Preverbs, Aspect, and the Affirmative Marker
Mingrelian has has a richer system of preverbs (preradical verbal prefixes of slot -4)
than any other Kartvelian language. According to ASATIANI 1953, there are twelve simple
preverbs and eighty complex ones, the latter formed by combining simple ones (which
typically indicate direction) with additional morphemes, such as la- ‘inside’, k’o- ‘beside’,
c’o- ‘in front of’, ša- ‘between, among’, no- ‘on’, to- ‘under’, for example, mi-c’o-, gi-la, dino-. It must be added that the number cited above includes a few that were borrowed from
Georgian with specific roots and are used seldom or not at all with inherited words.
Among the preverbs, quite a few are used almost entirely to indicate direction or
spatial orientation; for example, gi-to-ren ‘s/he is under’, mi-to-ren ‘s/he is among’
(examples adapted from KIPSHIDZE 1914:0106). It has been suggested that the preverbs
of Mingrelian, which provide rich expression of location and direction, are the functional
counterpart of the postpositions of Georgian (CHIKOBAVA 1936:130).
A second function of preverbs is to add some nuance of meaning; these preverbs are
not predictable and must be listed in the lexicon. Examples are given below in discussion of
the perfective future.
A further function of preverbs is to indicate perfectivity; adding one of the preverbs
še-, do-, o-, ga/go/ge-, mi-, mo-, e-, or i- usually makes a verb form perfective; for example, 
31
vč’ari ‘I wrote it (aorist, imperfective)’, do-vč’ari ‘I wrote it (aorist, perfective’). These
same preverbs form the future set of screeves, as discussed below.
It must be emphasized that there is not a one-to-one correspondence between
perfectivity and the occurrence of a preverb. Some roots are inherently perfective and may
or may not (depending upon the verb) permit preverbs; others are inherently imperfective
and may or may not take a preverb. Mingrelian has a special device to cancel the
perfectivizing role of a preverb; this is a marker ti, ma, or tima, which may occur between
the preverb and verb root; for example, mi-ti-vogoruank ‘I am finding it’ (compare, the
perfective aorist kə-mi-vogoree ‘I found it’), ge-təme-evgonenk ‘I am hearing of it’
(compare, the perfective future ge-evgonenk ‘I will hear of it’) (MACHAVARIANI
1974:133, CHUMBURIDZE 1986:36).
Perfective aspect also depends upon screeve and series. There are a few verbs that
are perfective in Series II and III, even though they do not take a preverb; for example, tkuu
‘s/he said it’, uc’uu ‘s/he told him/her it’, txuu ‘s/he requested it’, xuu ‘she bore him, he
fathered her’, kiminə ‘s/he did it’. These forms do not require, but occur felicitously with,
the affirmative marker, ko; for example, ko-kiminə ‘s/he did it’, ko-xuu ‘she bore him, he
fathered her’. The affirmative, ko, frequently cooccurs with perfectivizing preverbs, and for
some verbs it may substitute for a preverb in forming the perfective future (see below)
(CHUMBURIDZE 1986:36-37).
2.2.4. The Evidential and the Organization of Series
When the speaker cannot or does not wish to vouch for the correctness of a
statement, she uses the EVIDENTIAL category. This is often referred to as the “unseen” and
opposes the “seen” or non-evidential. In the Kartvelian languages Series III and (for those
that have it) Series IV express the evidential corresponding to Series II and I, respectively.
This can be summarized by means of the chart below.
32
System of Series in Mingrelian
SEEN UNSEEN
Series I Series IV
Series II Series III
Series III may also be used to express the perfect and pluperfect. [Analysis based on
ROGAVA 1953.]
2.2.5. Screeves
Series I is more complex than other series, in that it contains two sets of subseries,
the present subseries and the future subseries. The screeves of the present subseries are the
present, the imperfect, the present subjunctive, the present conditional, the imperfective
future, and the imperfective conditional.
All screeves of the present subseries are based on a single stem, which we will refer
to as the present stem. The present stem consists minimally of the verb root and a series
marker. Verbs of Classes 1 and 3 use series markers that have the surface forms -un, -in,
-ən, -en, -an, -uan, or zero; since verb roots are usually consonant-final, verbs of these
classes have present stems ending in a consonant even if they take a null series marker.
Examples of series markers are č’ar-un-s ‘she is writing it’, r-txi-in-k ‘I request of you’, i-len-s ‘he passes by’, o-rǯgin-an-c-ə ‘he outdoes him’, v-i-puč-uan-k ‘I swear it’, i-bon-t-ə
‘you(Pl) bathe’. Verbs of classes 2 and 4 have present stems ending in a vowel, generally
the series marker -e, -u or -u-u. Examples include r-e-n ‘s/he is’, i-rd-u-u-n ‘s/he grows
(up)’. While some specialists consider these vowel suffixes to be formants of the passive
voice and/or of the potential category, rather than series markers (“thematic markers”), they
are here treated as series markers. All of these suffixes have in common that they appear in
Series I forms and not in Series II (KIPSHIDZE 1914:053-054, 061, CHIKOBAVA
1936:133-135, MARGVELASHVILI 1988). In the presentation that follows, the 
33
morphologically minimal forms are discussed; in all screeves, additional categories and
markers are possible.
The present expresses present tense, imperfective aspect, and indicative mood. It is
formed by adding Set A/C subject markers (see Summary of Subject Markers by Screeve,
above in §2.2.2), together with the -k of the first and second person singular, directly to the
present stem; for example, č’ar-un-s ‘s/he is writing it’ (Class 1), ɣur-u-n ‘s/he is dying’
(Class 2). (Examples here are from the Senak dialect; in the Z-S dialect the -ən series
marker would occur instead of -un.) In the first and second persons singular of the present
(and of the perfective future) the final n-k may optionally delete; for example, vipuč-uank//vipučua ‘ I swear it’.
The imperfect expresses past time, imperfective aspect, and indicative mood. It is
formed from the present stem with the addition of the augment -d and the screeve marker -i.
It uses Set B subject markers, and the third person markers -u/-es replace (or delete) the
screeve marker, as they do in other screeves. An example is č’ar-un-d-u ‘s/he was writing’,
ɣur-u-d-u ‘s/he was dying’.
The present subjunctive expresses present time, imperfective aspect, and subjunctive
mood. It consists of the augmented present stem, together with the screeve marker -a and
the Set A subject markers; ɣur-u-d-a-s ‘s/he would be dying’.8 In the first and second
persons there are parallel forms in which -ee or -e is substituted for -a; b-č’ar-un-d-e ‖
b-č’ar-un-d-a ‘I would be writing’.
The present conditional is formed from the imperfect with the addition of the marker
-k’on ‘would, should’, perhaps best viewed as an enclitic; for example, č’ar-un-d-u-k’on ‘if
s/he is writing’.
The imperfective future expresses the nuance of probability (KIZIRIA 1982:119); it
is formed from the present subjunctive (with its characteristic variations) plus the form
iʔuapu or iʔii. The choice of iʔuapu, iʔii, or the shortened forms iʔi, ii does not correspond to
dialectal distribution, and the forms do not differ in meaning; the last named is enclitic.
Sometimes this screeve contains a preverb also. Examples of the screeve are b-č’ar-un-d-e
iʔuapu ‘I will be writing it’, č’ar-un-d-a-s iʔuapu ‘s/he will be writing it’, a-k’et-en-d-a-s-ii
34
‘I will be doing it’. Although the formation described here applies to verbs of all classes,
there is a group of verbs, which seem to be stative, which have no perfective/imperfective
opposition, and which form this screeve by other means; for example, ixvenuu or ixvenuapu
is the future of x-e-n ‘s/he is sitting’. A further set, which appear to be mostly atelic verbs,
have a single form that functions as present and as imperfective future; for example, ingars
‘s/he is crying, s/he will be crying’.
The imperfective conditional consists formally of the present conditional and the
form iʔuapudu or iʔidu, equivalent to the third person singular habitual form of ‘be’. An
example is č’ar-un-də-k’on iʔuapudu ‘s/he would have been writing’.
The words iʔuapu, iʔii, iʔi (ii), iʔuapudu, iʔidu, are referred to as auxiliaries but do
not have different forms for different persons and numbers (see examples above); on the
other hand, when used independently as the future and habitual respectively of ‘be’, they do
conjugate for different persons and numbers. Because some scholars view these as
auxiliaries, they consider the imperfective future and imperfective conditional to be analytic
(periphrastic), rather than synthetic. For the same reason, they may perfer not to view these
forms as screeves. We might note, however, that since these forms do not conjugate for
person and number, they do not qualify as auxiliaries by our definition, and the
constructions are not here considered analytic.
The form of present subseries of Series I screeves are summarized in the table below,
which refers to the Summary of Subject Markers by Screeve, above in §2.2.2. The tables
given here simplify by not representing the variation discussed above.
35
Summary of the Morphology of Series I Present Subseries Screeves
Present root + SM + Set A/C
Imperfect root + SM + d + i + Set B
Present Subjunctive root + SM + d + a + Set A
Present Conditional root + SM + d + i + Set B + k’on
Imperfective Future root + SM + d + a + Set A iʔuapu
Imperfective Conditional root + SM + d + i + Set B + k’on iʔuapudu
Verb forms of the future subseries are based on the future stem; it is formed from the
present stem in various ways. (1) Most verbs of Classes 1 and 2 form the future stem by
adding a preverb to the present stem. The ones most often used are še (‖ši), do (‖da‖de‖di), o,
ga (‖go‖ge); mi, mo, e, and i are used less often; for example, go-t’ax-ən-s is the future of
t’ax-ən-s ‘s/he breaks it’. The selection of one preverb rather than another is lexically
determined, and a single base may take more than one preverb, generally with differences of
meaning; for example, mo-č’k’ir-en-s ‘s/he will cut down (tree, wheat)’, gi-no-č’k’ir-ən-s
‘s/he will cut through it’, gi-ša-č’k’ir’-ən-s ‘s/he will cut it out’, all corresponding to the
present č’k’ir-ən-s ‘s/he is cutting it’. The affirmative marker ko- is often used together with
a preverb; for example, kə-ge-igens ‘s/he will understand, find out about it’, kə-mi-igens
‘s/he will win it’.
(2) Verbs that do not take a preverb may form the future stem by adding the
affirmative marker ko to the present stem; for example, ki-txiins ‘s/he will request it’ is the
future of txiins ‘s/he requests it’; ki-ibirs ‘s/he will sing’ is the future of ibirs ‘s/he is
singing’.
(3) As discussed above, some verbs use a morpheme ti, ma or tima to cancel the
perfectivizing effect of the preverb; this occurs usually in the present subseries. For some
verbs the difference between the present and future stems is the presence of this
imperfectivizing prefix; for example, present ši-tmi-(i)-naxu ‘s/he saves it’ corresponds to
the perfective future ši-inaxu ‘s/he will save it’, present gi-tme-gens ‘s/he understands, finds
out’ corresponds to future gi-(i)gens ‘s/he will understand, find out’. 
36
These uses of the affirmative or of the imperfectivizing prefix to form the future in
Mingrelian are unlike anything in any other Kartvelian language.
(4) In Class 3 verbs borrowed from Georgian, it is common to form perfective
futures by adding the preradical vowel i- or, in verbs with an indirect object, u-; for example,
the present mušens ‘s/he is working’ corresponds to the future i-mušens ‘s/he will work’.
(5) Still other verbs use some form of substitution to form the future stem from the
present. For example they may use a different series marker, often together with a preverb;
for example, present lal-ən-s ‘(dog) is barking’ corresponds to future mi- o-lal-an-s ‘(dog)
will bark at someone’. Sometimes more than one substitution is involved; for example, the
future a-škur-in-e-n ‘s/he will be afraid’ replaces both the preradical vowel and the series
marker of the present, o-škur-u-n ‘s/he is afraid’, and adds the root extension -in. Such
substitutions and additions are idiosyncratic and unpredictable.
(6) Lastly, a few verbs have a suppletive relation between the present and future
stems; (o)r-e-n ‘s/he is’, iʔuapun ‘s/he will be’.
The perfective future expresses future tense, perfective aspect, indicative mood. It is
formed from the future stem by adding the subject markers of Set A/C; an example is
do-č’ar-un-s ‘s/he will write it’.
The habitual consists of the future stem, the stem augment d, and the subject markers
of Set B; do-č’ar-un-d-u ‘s/he writes it (regularly)’.
The future subjunctive expresses future tense, perfective aspect, and subjunctive
mood. It is formed from the augmented future stem by the addition of the screeve marker a
and the subject markers of Set A; do-č’ar-un-d-a-s ‘s/he would write it’.
The future conditional consists of the augmented future stem, the screeve marker i,
the subject markers of Set B, and the marker k’on; for example, do-č’ar-un-d-u-k’on ‘if s/he
would write it’.
Thus the formation of the screeves of the future subseries from the future stem is
parallel to the formation of the screeves of the present subseries from the present stem.
Nearly all future stems, however, resemble the aorist stem, apart from the presence of series
markers in the former; for this reason, they are sometimes considered to be derived from the 
37
aorist stem, rather than from the present stem. The summary chart below refers to only one
method of stem formation, (1) above.
Summary of the Morphology of Series I Future Subseries Screeves
Perfective Future preverb + root + SM + Set A/C
Habitual preverb + root + SM + d + i + Set B
Future Subjunctive preverb + root + SM + d + a + Set A
Future Conditional preverb + root + SM + d + i + Set B + k’on
[Analysis of Series I screeves based on MARGVELASHVILI 1980 and CHUMBURIDZE
1986:131-146; examples that are otherwise unattributed are from the same sources.]
All Series II screeves are based on the aorist stem, which consists minimally of the
verb root. The aorist stem may also contain a preverb, indicating perfectivity, and other
morphemes. In Series I, the perfective/imperfective contrast distinguishes one screeve from
another, since it is correlated with a contrast in tense (present vs. future); but in Series II, the
perfective and imperfective are viewed as belonging to a single screeve. Some Class 3 verbs
form the aorist stem, like the future stem, with the preradical vowel i-; Class 3 verbs that
take the i- formant in both the present subseries of Series I and in Series II and verbs that
take this formant in neither of these sets of screeves often add the affirmative marker in
Series II. For example, k-i-ngar-u ‘s/he cried’, beside i-ngar-u in the same screeve, takes iin all series, while ko-sxap’-u ‘s/he danced’, beside sxap’-u in the same screeve, does not
take i- in either Series I or Series II.
The aorist screeve expresses past time and indicative mood. Formally it consists of
the aorist stem, together with the screeve marker -i, -ii, -e, -ee, (or occasionally both, -e-i)
and the Set B subject markers. An example of the imperfective aspect is č’ar-u (Class 1),
which has the perfective counterpart do-č’ar-u ‘s/he wrote it’; other examples are i-laʔap-u
(Class 3) ‘s/he played’, do-ɣur-u (Class 2) ‘s/he died’.
38
The imperative is also expressed with the aorist screeve; there is no morphological
difference between an imperative and a second person aorist form. For example, gor-i ‘look
for it’, with the root gor and the screeve marker -i, also serves as an aorist in the meaning
‘you (Sg) looked for it’; oskir-ee may mean ‘dry it’ or ‘you (Sg) dried it’.
The subjunctive II is made up of the aorist stem, the screeve marker -a, and Set A
subject markers; for example, č’ar-a-s (imperfective, Class 1), do-č’ar-a-s (perfective, Class
1) ‘may s/he write it’, do-ɣur-a-s (perfective, Class 2) ‘may s/he die’. Alternate endings
substitute -e or -ee for -a, as in the present subjunctive.
The conditional II consists of the aorist with the addition of the marker -k’on; for
example, č’ar-u-k’on (imperfective, Class 1), do-č’ar-u-k’on (perfective, Class 1) both ‘if
s/he wrote it’.
Summary of the Morphology of Series II Screeves
Aorist stem + i/e + Set B
Subjunctive II stem + a + Set A
Conditional II stem + i/e + Set B + k’on
For verbs of Class 1, the stem of Series III consists of the preradical vowel i-, the
root, and the series marker -u; the preradical vowel is realized as u- in the third person.
Some verbs add one of the series markers used in Series I, and preverbs are often present.
Verbs of Class 3 follow the same schema, usually without a preverb. Class 1 and 3 verbs of
this series are inverted, as explained below. For verbs of Class 2, the Series III stem is
composed of the root and the suffix -ere/ele. Originally -ele was derived from -ere by
dissimilation after a stem containing r. According to ASATIANI 1970, the -ere form is (or
was at the time of her fieldwork) still used by old people in some subdialects, but the -ele
form is more widespread and is productive today; this may be shortened to -e. Verbs of all
classes may be imperfective or perfective within each screeve, just as in Series II.
The first evidential (perfect) consists of the Series III stem and Set C subject
markers, together with the -k of the first and second persons singular; for example, 
39
u-č’ar-u-n (imperfective, Class 1), du-u-č’ar-u-n (perfective, Class 1) both ‘s/he has
evidently written it’, u-ragad-u-n (Class 3) ‘s/he has evidently talked’, do-škvid-e(le)-n
(perfective, Class 2) ‘s/he has evidently drowned’ (compare, d-u-škvid-u-ap-u-n (perfective,
Class 1) ‘s/he has evidently drowned him’).
The second evidential (pluperfect) is formed from the Series III stem, the augment
-d, the screeve marker -i, and the markers of Set B; for example, du-u-č’ar-u-d-u ‘s/he had
evidently written it’, do-ɣur-ele-d-u ‘s/he had evidently died’.
The subjunctive III (past subjunctive) is made up of the augmented Series III stem,
the screeve marker -a, and the markers of Set A; for example, du-u-č’ar-u-d-a-s ‘would that
s/he had written it’.
The conditional III consists of the second evidential and the marker -k’on; for
example, du-u-č’ar-u-d-u-k’on ‘if s/he had written it’.
Summary of the Morphology of Series III Screeves
First Evidential stem + Set C
Second Evidential stem + d + i + Set B
Subjunctive III stem + d + a + Set A
Conditional III stem + d + i + Set B + k’on
The Series IV stem consists of the prefix no- (which is usually considered a preverb
because of its position), the root, and the suffix -u-e. -u-e is treated here as a complex series
marker, because of its position and function.
The third evidential consists of the Series IV stem and Set C subject markers
(including the -k of the first and second person singular); for example, no-č’ar-u-e-n
‘evidently s/he is writing it’.
The fourth evidential is composed of the Series IV stem, the augment -d, the screeve
marker -i, and the subject markers of Set B; for example, no-č’ar-u-e-d-u ‘evidently s/he
was writing it’.
40
The subjunctive IV is formed from the augmented Series IV stem, the screeve
marker a, and the Set A subject markers; for example, no-č’ar-u-e-d-a-s.
The conditional IV is made from the fourth evidential by adding the marker -k’on;
for example, no-č’ar-u-e-d-u-k’on.
Summary of the Morphology of Series IV Screeves
Third Evidential no + root + ue + Set C
Fourth Evidential no + root + ue + d + i + Set B
Subjunctive IV no + root + ue + d + a + Set A
Conditional IV no + root + ue + d + i + Set B + k’on
[Analysis of Series II, III, and IV based on CHIKOBAVA 1936:133-148, as modified by
ROGAVA 1953, with ASATIANI 1970 and MARGVELASHVILI 1984; examples from
CHIKOBAVA 1936:170, CHUMBURIDZE 1986:134-135, and the author’s fieldnotes.]
The description above makes generalizations about the forms within a single series;
there are also cross-series generalizations to be made. Every series has a screeve in the past
tense (imperfect, aorist, second evidential, fourth evidential); each of these uses the screeve
marker i (in the aorist there is the alternative e used by some verbs) and Set B markers.
With some exceptions, the third person markers of Set B replace the screeve marker. In
each series there is a conditional, which consists of the past tense screeve and the marker
k’on. In every series there is a subjunctive with the screeve marker a and the subject
markers of Set A. In every series except Series II, all screeves except the first have the
augment d.
2.2.6. Inversion
Class 1 and 3 verbs undergo inversion in Series III. The syntax of inversion is
described in §3.2.1; morphologically, it is a construction in which the notional subject is the
(surface) indirect object. If there is a notional direct object, it is the surface subject; if not,
the verb form has default third person singular subject marking. The regular object 
41
agreement markers (§2.2.2) indicate agreement with the surface indirect object, which is the
notional subject. As noted above, for verbs of Classes 1 and 3, the Series III stem consists
of i + root + u; the object agreement markers precede the preradical vowel i-. In the first and
second persons these combine without change, but in the third person we get the special
portmanteau form, u-, fulfilling the functions both of the zero form of the third person object
marker and of the preradical vowel:
1. person m-i-zim-u-n ‘evidently I measured it’
2. person g-i-zim-u-n ‘evidently you (Sg) measured it’
3. person u-zim-u-n ‘evidently s/he measured it’
Number agreement works on slightly different principles in inversion. According to
CHIKOBAVA (1936:98-99), while plurality is not marked in the verb for third person
objects in direct construction, in inversion plurality is marked for surface objects of all three
persons.
1. person m-i-zim-u-nan ‘evidently we measured it’
2. person g-i-zim-u-nan ‘evidently you(Pl) measured it’
3. person u-zim-u-nan ‘evidently they measured it’
In screeves that take Set A subject agreement markers, -an marks object plurality; in
screeves that take Set B, -es is used; in those that take Set C, -nan is used (§2.2.2). The first
evidential, illustrated above, takes Set C.
In inversion in Series III, plurality of the third person surface subject is not marked
in the verb, according to CHIKOBAVA (1936:98-99) and KIZIRIA (1982:140). This can
be seen in the contrast between the two sentences below.
(7) k’oč-em-s d-u-ʔvilu-na(n) ɣeǯ-i
man-Pl-Dat PV-3.Sg.Obj-kill-Pl pig-Nom
‘The men evidently killed a pig.’
(8) k’o-s d-u-ʔvilu-(n) ɣeǯ-ep-i
man-Dat PV-3.Sg.Obj-kill-3.Sg.Subj pig-Pl-Nom
‘The man evidently killed pigs.’
42
In both sentences the preradical vowel u-, the special portmanteau morpheme used in
inversion, marks agreement with the third person surface object, ‘man, men’. The plurality
of this nominal is marked with the suffix -nan in the first sentence. But the plural surface
subject, ɣeǯepi ‘pigs’, in the second sentence does not condition any plural marker; instead
the verb has the third person singular marker -n. Word final n deletes (§1.4.2), but it is put
in parentheses here for clarity.
Verbs in Class 4 undergo inversion in all series. Their morphology is similar to that
described above, but it is highly idiosyncratic and unpredictable; for example, they may
have a preradical vowel other than i-. Relative potentials, however, are derived Class 4
verbs, and their morphology is more regular. As described below in §2.2.7, they take the
preradical vowel a-. Preradical vowels other than i- do not have portmanteau forms in the
third person, and the zero morpheme that represents third person object agreement combines
with them without change:
1. person m-a-tas-e-n ‘I can sow it’
2. person g-a-tas-e-n ‘you can sow it’
3. person a-tas-e-n ‘s/he can sow it’
According to URIDIA (1960:177), number agreement in inversion in relative
potentials is very different from that described above for Series III. In his examples, it is the
surface subject, not the surface indirect object, that can condition plural marking, regardless
of person.
(9) ma va-v-a-ʔvil-e-k inen-si
me/Nom Neg-1.Subj-a-kill-SM-1.Subj they-Dat
‘They cannot kill me.’
(10) čki va-v-a-ʔvil-e-t inen-s
us/Nom Neg-1.Subj-a-kill-SM-Pl they-Dat
‘They cannot kill us.’
(11) ina va-a-ʔvil-e inen-si
her/Nom Neg-a-kill-SM-(3.Sg.Subj) they-Dat
‘They cannot kill him/her.’
43
(12) inepi va-a-ʔvil-e-na inen-s
them/Nom Neg-a-kill-SM-Pl they-Dat
‘They cannot kill them.’
TUITE (1988, Ch. 5) throws doubt on Uridia’s general claim, but suggests that there is some
evidence of variation by screeve within the relative potential. There may additionally be
variation by dialect.
2.2.7. Transitive/Intransitive
By a TRANSITIVE verb is meant one with a subject and direct object; an INTRANSITIVE
verb is one that does not satisfy this criterion. In Mingrelian, as in other Kartvelian
languages, nominals may be omitted if their referents are clear in discourse; omissions under
these circumstances do not alter transitivity. For example,
(13) k’oči ɣes ʔviluns
man/Nom pig/Dat he/kill/it
‘The man is killing a pig.’
remains transitive if we omit the object as understood (k’oči ʔviluns ‘the man is killing it’),
or even if we omit both the subject and the object (ʔviluns ‘he is killing it’). The verb form
is transitive and cannot be used as an intransitive; likewise, intransitive forms cannot be used
as transitive.
Intransitive verbs of Class 2 may be derived in a variety of ways. Those discussed
first are usually referred to in the literature as “passive”, but as we shall see, some are true
passives, others are mediopassives, and still others are inchoatives.
The “markerless” intransitives have no affix that consistently distinguishes them
from the corresponding transitives throughout the full set of screeves. In Series I the
intransitives use the series marker -u, while the corresponding transitives use -un or some
other series marker of Classes 1 and 3 (that is, a series marker of the form -(V)VC). In
addition, in the present third person subject forms the transitive and intransitive forms are
distinguished by subject suffix. These differences are illustrated in the table below, but they
do not distinguish between these types in other series. In Series II-IV, the intransitives are 
44
distinguished from the corresponding transitives in at least one of two ways. First, the
“complex” type of markerless intransitive is distinguished from the corresponding transitive
by ablaut grade, as illustrated below, with the example ʔorid-/ʔord- ‘s/he rots it’/ ‘it rots’.
Transitive Intransitive
Series I
Present ʔorid-un-s ʔord-u-n
Imperfect ʔorid-un-d-u ʔord-u-d-u
Present Subjunctive ʔorid-un-d-a-s ʔord-u-d-a-s
Series II
Aorist ʔorid-u ʔord-u
Subjunctive II ʔorid-a-s ʔord-a-s
Series III
First Evidential u-ʔorid-u-n do-ʔorad-e-n
Series IV
Third Evidential no-ʔorid-ue-n no-ʔorad-ue-n
As shown in the table, the transitive form is characterized by i-grade, while the intransitive
form has 0/-grade of the stem in Series I and II and a-grade in Series III and IV. Other verbs
of this type include škirit’-/škirt’/škirat’ ‘s/he puts it out’/ ‘it goes out’, dirik’-/dirk’/dirak’
‘s/he bends it’/ ‘it bends’, čilit/čirt/čilat ‘s/he misleads him/her’/ ‘s/he errs’; but members of
the type are not numerous (GUDAVA 1974, DANELIA 1976).
The “simple” type of markerless intransitive is not distinguished from the
corresponding transitive by ablaut, but by a variety of affixes.
skir-u-n ‘it dries (off)’ o-skir-u-an-s ‘s/he dries it (off)’
xom-u-n ‘it dries (up)’ o-xom-u-an-s ‘s/he makes it dry (up)’
Synchronically the transitives of this table must be considered causatives, a category treated
more completely below; they are sometimes treated differently from other causatives 
45
because diachronically they replace a simple transitive. It should be added here that the
markerless intransitive is a non-productive category (MACHAVARIANI 1959).
A second type of intransitive makes use of the prefixal formant (character vowel) ior a-. Forms of this type are distinguished from all others by the fact that their present stems
are formed with the double series marker -u-u. The prefix i- forms ABSOLUTE
INTRANSITIVES, which take a derived subject and no object; a- is used to form RELATIVE
INTRANSITIVES, which take a derived subject and an indirect object. The following example
illustrates the difference between these: i-ɣup’-u-u-n ‘s/he is killed’ / m-a-ɣup’-u-u-n ‘s/he
is killed and this affects me’, where ‘me’ of the latter form is expressed with the indirect
object marker -m. (The second form would typically be used if a family member or close
friend were killed.) The ways in which the intransitive forms are distinguished from the
transitive in Series I and II are illustrated below.
Series I
Present i-č’ar-u(u)-n ‘it is written’ č’ar-un-s ‘s/he writes it’
Series II
Aorist i-č’ar-u ‘it was written’ č’ar-u ‘s/he wrote it’
Although the forms in the table lack preverbs, preverbs are usual in the aorist. Their
presence changes the simple structure of the verbs forms as follows: do-v-i-č’ar-i →
d-i-v-č’ar-i ‘I was written’.
There is a small class of “deponent” verbs that has characteristics that combine two or
more classes.9 Such verbs have in Series I the series marker -ap, which is characteristic of
Class 1 or 3, and the series marker -u, which is characteristic of Class 2 or 4. They have the
prefix i- of the intransitive. In some instances they contrast with simple prefixal
intransitives; v-i-xvam-ap-u-k ‘I bestow blessings (on someone)’ / v-i-xvam-u-u-k ‘I am
blessed (by someone)’. The meaning of the deponent form may be active, as is characteristic
of Class 1; for example, dus iʔvilapun self/Dat he/kill ‘he kills himself’. Note that these
verbs are exceptions to the class characteristics summarized above in §2.2.1.
46
A third morphological type is formed with the prefix o-. A subset of this type is
stative; for example, gi-m-o-por-u-n ‘it covers for me’, used in the following sentence:
(14) du-s kud-i gimoporu (DANELIA 1976:171)
head-Dat hat-Nom it/covers/me
‘The hat covers my head’ or ‘The hat covers the head for me.’
Other examples, however, appear not to be stative; for example, v-o-du-u-k ‘I argue with
him’, v-o-verd-u-k ‘I implore him’. (In these examples ‘I’ is the subject and ‘him’ is the
indirect object.)
A well-defined subtype of the o-prefixal intransitives is the “perception” intransitive,
always with two arguments (subject and indirect object) and always denominal. They
express the grammatical object’s perception of the grammatical subject; for example, m-omet’-u-n ‘it seems large, more to me’, m-o-č’ič’ar-u-n ‘it seems small, few to me’, m-omʒim-u-n ‘it seems heavy to me’, m-o-nc’ar-u-n ‘it seems bitter to me’, where in each
example ‘me’ is grammatical indirect object. (These might alternatively be translated ‘I find
it heavy’ or ‘I consider it heavy’.) One peculiarity of this subtype is that in Series II forms its
prefix is e-, rather than o-; compare m-e-č’ič’ar-u ‘it seemed small, few to me’, m-e-mʒim-u
‘it seemed heavy to me’, m-e-nc’ar-u ‘it seemed bitter to me’.
Members of a small class of intransitives are formed with the suffix -d; most express
the inchoative. Examples are do-šur-d-u ‘s/he got tired’, tan-d-u-n ‘it gets light, it dawns’,
šin-d-u-n ‘it swells’. [Section based on DANELIA 1976.]
All of the intransitives above are usually called “passives”, though some are
mediopassives (simple unaccusatives), some inchoatives, and others express other special
meanings. All are characterized morphologically by use of the series marker -u in the Series
I stem.
Potentials constitute a distinct category of intransitives, characterized by the series
marker -e in Series I. Like the prefixal intransitives described above, they are formed with
the preradical vowels i- (absolute) or a- (relative). Absolute forms express the epistemic
potential; for example, i-tas-e-n ‘it is possible for it to be sown, it can be sown’, i-č’k’om-e-n
‘it can be eaten, it is edible’. Absolute potentials are in Class 2, regardless of the class to 
47
which the corresponding non-potential belongs. Relative forms express the root potential;
for example, a-tas-e-n ‘s/he can sow it’, a-č’k’om-e-n ‘s/he can eat it’. Relative potentials
are members of Class 4, and, the nominal expressing the one who is able is the grammatical
indirect object (initial subject, see inversion in §2.2.6 and §3.2.1). Some potentials have the
formant -in (occasionally -ev) either obligatorily, as in a-l-in-e ‘s/he can go away’, or
optionally, as in mi-a-č-e // mi-a-č-in-e ‘s/he can give it’; in verbs that take it, this formant
occurs in forms of both Series I and II.
Many roots have both potential and dynamic intransitives formed with the prefixes iand a-; in Series I these are kept distinct by their series markers. Compare i-tas-u-n ‘it is
sown’, a-tas-u-n ‘it is sown for him, his are sown’ with the potentials cited above. [Potential
forms from CHIKOBAVA 1936:113, SHEROZIA 1980, SHEROZIA 1984, Ch. 3].
The forms discussed above in this section are intransitives of Class 2 or 4, many
contrasting with transitives of Class 1 based on the same root; in most instances the Class 2
and 4 forms seem to be derived from the Class 1 forms. Verbs of Class 3 do not participate
in some of these morphological oppositions; verbs of this class are overwhelmingly
intransitive, though some may take an optional direct object, as illustrated by the pairs below.
(15) baɣana-k ilaʔapu ezo-s
child-Nar he/play yard-Dat
‘The child played in the yard.’
(16) baɣana-k nardi ilaʔapu
child-Nar backgammon-Nom she/play
‘The child played backgammon.’
(17) ate k’oč-i ǯgiro ibirs
this man-Nom well he/sing
‘This man sings well.’
48
(18) ate k’oč-i ǯgiro ibirs diaraš obir-em-s
this man-Nom well he/sing wedding song-Pl-Dat
‘This man sings the wedding songs well.’
Case marking of subjects and objects is described below in the section on syntax; for the
present it is sufficient to note that the nominals ‘backgammon’ and ‘songs’ are marked as
direct objects. For verbs of Class 3, unlike those of Class 1, the verb forms in the (a)
examples do not imply the presence of a direct object. Thus, these forms are basically
intransitive, as are forms of Class 2; but unlike the latter, Class 3 forms can also be used
transitively.
Some verbs of Class 3 are characterized by a preradical vowel i- in all forms of Series
I and II; ibirs ‘s/he is singing’ (in (17-18)) and ingars ‘s/he is crying’ are verbs of this sort.
Other verbs of this class have the same prefix in forms of the future subseries and Series II,
but not in the present subseries; ilaʔapu ‘s/he played’ in the examples above is a verb of this
type. Still other verbs in Class 3 do not use i- at all; for example, vsxap’i ‘I danced’, vragade
‘I spoke’, bɣoree ‘I shouted’ (KIPSHIDZE 1914:203, 214, 272, 323-324, 302, 352; compare,
NOZADZE 1974:42).
Causatives can be formed from both transitives and intransitives, from at least some
verbs of each class. The regular formant of the causative of verbs of Class 1 is the circumfix
o- -ap-u-, to which is added in Series I the regular series marker -an, producing the following
contrasts:
zim-un-s ‘he measures it’ o-zim-ap-u-an-s ‘he has her measure it’
k’vat-un-s ‘he cuts it’ o-k’vat-ap-u-an-s ‘he has her cut it’
tas-un-s ‘he sows it’ o-tas-ap-u-an-s ‘he has her sow it’
xaš-un-s ‘he boils it’ o-xaš-ap-u-an-s ‘he has her boil it’
(CHIKOBAVA 1936:159)
However, there are some transitives in which -ap of this circumfix does not appear; for
example, o-gur-u-an-s ‘s/he teaches it’ (CHIKOBAVA 1938:267).
Note that it is the root that forms the base of the causative, not the Series I stem. The
prefixal portion of the causative circumfix, o-, appears in Series I and II but is replaced by 
49
other obligatory formants in Series III and IV. The suffixal portion of the circumfix,
--ap-u-, appears consistently in forms of all screeves, as shown below:
Series I o-č’ar-ap-u-an-s ‘he makes him write it’
Series II o-č’ar-ap-u-u ‘he made him write it’
Series III u-č’ar-ap-u-ap-u-n ‘he apparently made him write it’
Series IV no-č’ar-ap-u-ap-e-n ‘he apparently makes him write it’
 (GUDAVA 1984:74)
In the aorist, which illustrates Series II above, the final -u suffix is the marker of the third
person singular subject; the double -u-u (or long -u:) is often simplified to a single short
vowel, -u. In the first and second persons of the aorist of causative verbs, the attested
ending is -e-e, likewise often simplified to a single short vowel, -e, by a regular process.
The first of the -e suffixes has the same source as the -u of the causative circumfix
(GUDAVA 1984, MACHAVARIANI 1988), but it is not clear whether the -u is present in
the synchronic underlying form. All causatives (together with other verbs that form the
aorist with -e) have alternate forms of the third person plural subject form of the aorist: -ues/-ees, the former preserving this portion of the causative circumfix, for example, o-č’arap-u-es (GUDAVA 1984:76). In the subjunctive screeve of Series II, the -u of the causative
circumfix shows up more clearly; for example, v-o-gur-u-a ‘let me teach it’
(MACHAVARIANI 1988:95).
Many of the Class 2 intransitives have corresponding transitives which are not,
however, causatives. It has already been noted here that “simple” markerless intransitives
correspond to transitives that must, on morphological grounds, be classified as causatives;
for example, o-skir-u-an-s ‘s/he dries it (off)’, from the Class 2 form skir-u-n ‘it dries (off)’,
using the circumfix o--u. Other Class 2 verbs may add the suffix -in in forming a causative:
v-o-č’it-in-u-an-k ‘I redden it, make it red’, v-o-l-in-u-an-k ‘I carry it (lit. make it go)’
(MACHAVARIANI 1988:96-97).
Formation of causatives from Classes 3 and 4 has apparently not been studied in
detail, but a few examples of causatives of Class 3 verbs can be found: v-o-laʔ-ap-u-an-k ‘I
50
make him/her play’ (KIPSHIDZE 1914:058), (compare, b-laʔ-ap-en-s ‘I play’), v-o-bir-uan-k ‘I make him/her sing’ (compare, v-i-bir-k ‘I sing’) (KIPSHIDZE 1914:203), v-o-ngaru-an-k ‘I make him/her cry’ (KIPSHIDZE 1914:214) (compare, the Class 3 form i-ngar-s
‘s/he cries’), v-o-ragad-u-an-k ‘I make him/her talk’ (compare, v-ragad-an-k ‘I talk’)
(KIPSHIDZE 1914:302). In these examples, at least, Class 3 verbs form Series I causatives
with the circumfix o--u-an-; note that this seems to differ from the regular formation of
Class 1 (with o--ap-u-an-) and to resemble more closely the formation illustrated above for
Class 2 verbs.
Causatives can also have potential forms; for example, va-m-a-ʔvil-ap-e (causative
of Class 1) ‘I cannot make her kill him’, va-m-a-ragad-ap-e (causative of Class 3) ‘I cannot
make him/her talk’ (SHEROZIA 1984:10). Note that most of the causative circumfix is
replaced here by the potential prefix, a-, and by the series marker of the potential, -e, with
only -ap remaining of the causative marking.
There are also some double causatives, but these are beyond the scope of this sketch.
Note that causatives are members of Class 1, regardless of the class to which the source
form belongs. Potentials of causatives are members of Class 2 (absolute forms) or 4
(relative forms), as are other potentials. [Analysis of causatives based primarily on
CHIKOBAVA 1936, GUDAVA 1984, MACHAVARIANI 1988.]
2.2.8. Positions in the Finite Verb Form
As a way of summarizing what is discussed above and filling in gaps of the topics
treated incompletely, the positions in the verb form are summarized below. Those that
precede the root are assigned negative numbers, those that follow, positive numbers. This
represents a minimum number of positions, and additional positions may be identified in
future research, especially in positions +1 and +3. List provided here are not exhaustive.
Positions in the Finite Verb Form
51
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +7
Status PV Impf Pers CV Root Root SM Aug Scrv Agrmt Cond Aux
 Dir+Loc prt pref ext mrkr suffix
ko- me- +no- (t)mV v- a- -ap-u -un -d -i -k -k’on -ii
va- go- +to- m- i- -ap -in -e -s
ga- do- +la- g- u- -u -ən -a -u
+ša- o- -in-u -en -n
+c’o- e- -in -an -t
+k’o- -ev -uan -an
+da- -u(-u) -es
-e -nan
-ue
Abbreviations are explained below, where positions are referred to by the numbers used
above. Except as otherwise stated, each position allows only one morpheme in a given verb
form.
-5. The affirmative marker ko- and its phonological variants can occur in the position termed
here STATUS, as can the negative marker va- and its variants. The remaining occupant
of this position, ga- and its variants, is characterized by ASATIANI (1953:14) as
marking aspect or the opposite action. It has been noted that the negative
occasionally follows the preverb, rather than preceding it (KIZIRIA 1982:118).
-4. The PREVERB position is really two positions. The preverbs may be simple, consisting of
only the first, DIRECTIONAL part, or complex, containing both the directional and
LOCATIONAL parts. no-, a formant of Series IV stems, is also included here.
-3. The IMPERFECTIVIZING PREFIX ti, ma or tima occurs in this position. It negates the
perfectivity of a preceding preverb and may occur only if slot -4 is occupied.
52
-2. The PERSON PREFIX position includes the first person subject markers (v-/b-/p’-/p-), the
first person object markers (b-/p’-/p-/m-), and the second person object markers
(g-/r-). These do not cooccur.
-1. The CHARACTER VOWEL or preradical vowel position includes the i-, e- or a- that is a
formant of some Class 2 intransitives, the i- that occurs with some Class 3
intransitives (in all forms, or just in forms of the future subseries and Series II,
depending upon the verb), the o- prefixal portion of the causative formant, as well as
o-, i- that is obligatory with certain lexical items. It also includes the prefixes that
mark version, a category that has not been described here.
0. The ROOT position is obligatory in all forms.
+1. ROOT EXTENSIONS include the causative markers, -ap-u-, -ap, -u, -in-u, as well as -in
(occasionally -ev), which occurs in some potential forms and in certain other forms,
lexically determined. Certain other elements occur in this position, but it is not clear
whether they are distinct morphemes synchonically (or only diachronically). Root
extensions have in common that they occur in Series II, as well as in the other series.
In addition, the root extensions seem to be derivational in nature, rather than
inflectional.
+2. SERIES MARKERS include those used by Class 1 and 3 verbs in Series I and by some of
these in Series III (-en, -in, -an, -ən, -un, -uan), those used by Class 2 alone (-e, -u-u),
and the suffixal formant of Series IV (-ue). It also includes -u, used by Class 2 verbs
in Series I and by verbs of all classes in Series III. This position may be simple or
complex; that is, two markers may cooccur under circumstances discussed in more
detail above.
+3. There is only one AUGMENT, -d, found in some screeves of all series except Series II.
+4. SCREEVE MARKERS distinguish one screeve from another within a series. They are
limited to -i, -e, -a.
+5. The person and number AGREEMENT SUFFIXES include (1) the -k of the first and second
person singular, which is found in only certain screeves, (2) the third person singular 
53
markers, -s, -u, -n, (3) the plural suffix of the first and second person, -t, and (4) the
third person plural markers, -an, -es, -nan. None of these cooccur.
+6. Position +6 can be occupied only by the marker -k’on, which forms CONDITIONALS.
+7. Position +7 is considered a separate word (termed an AUXILIARY) when it is occupied by
iʔuapu, iʔii, iʔi, iʔuapudu, or iʔidu, all formants of the imperfective future or
imperfective conditional; only when it is reduced to the form ii is it enclitic to the rest
of the verbal complex.
Except for the root, 0, there is no particular position that must be filled; a verb root, however,
cannot stand alone. The summary above does not include the quotative, question, or
subordinating enclitics (§3.4, §3.9).
54
3. Syntax
3.1. Internal structure of the Noun Phrase
In Mingrelian modifiers usually precede the head noun, as in the examples below. These
phrases illustrate adjectives, participles, quantifiers, pronouns, and nouns as modifiers of a head
noun.
(19) č’reli kotomi eǯgua ǯgiri osuri
multicolored/Base hen/Nom thiskind/Base good/Base wife/Nom
‘a multicolored hen’ ‘such a good wife’
ɣureli p’ap’a ekimi adamia
dead/PP/Base priest/Nom physician/Base Adamia
‘the dead priest’ ‘physician Adamia’
breli k’oč-k k’ilo xorc-i
many/Base man-Nar kilo/Base meat-Nom
‘many men’ ‘a kilo of meat’
sumi ǯimalepi xenc’pe-š doxore-ša
three/Base brothers/Nom governor-Gen palace-All
‘three brothers’ ‘to the governor’s palace’
ti p’ap’a-k ber-iš ku-s
that/Base priest-Nar old.man-Gen hat-Dat
‘that priest’ ‘the old man’s hat’
iri k’oč-k etiš otaxu-š k’əla
every/Base man-Nar his house-Gen key/Nom
‘every man’ ‘the key of/to his house’
abrešum-iš ʒap-it ser-iš dud-iše q’araul-i
silk-Gen thread-Inst evening-Gen head-Abl watchman-Nom
‘with a silk thread’ ‘watchman from the beginning of the evening’
(Examples in (19-20) from KIZIRIA 1982:191, 192, 194, 197, 200, 201, 225;
LOMTADZE 1954:208, 209.)
55
Modifiers sometimes follow the head; this is more common in the Z-S dialect.
(20) muma-skan-i do muma-čkim-i ʔude skan-s
father-your-Nom and father-my-Nom house your-Dat
‘your father and my father’ ‘to your house’
k’ar-i oze-ši osur-i muši-s
gate-Nom yard-Gen wife-Nom his-Dat
‘the gate to the yard’ ‘to his wife’
It is possessive pronouns that most often follow the head.
A modifier that precedes its head is not declined, either for number or for case; a modifier
that follows the head is declined, and the head may also be declined or not (KIPSHIDZE
1914:032).
A modifier that is not declined appears in base form (glossed above as “Base”), which is
the unmarked form and is identical to the nominative case form (see §2.1.1.). Undeclined
adjectives, participles, quantifiers, and pronouns are illustrated in (19) above. Nouns of
measurement (weight, length), container (bottle, basket), or title (profession, kinship term)
normally precede the head noun and appear in base form, as illustrated above.
In addition to these general rules, there are some specific rules governing the form of
preposed modifiers. (1) When a polysyllabic modifier preceding its head has a base form ending
in -u, that vowel often deletes; for example, rčin k’o-s ‘old man-Dat’ (compare, rčinu ‘old’), ǯim
c’q’ar-iti ‘salt water’ (compare, ǯimu ‘salt’), dur čikoba-š ʔude-ša ‘Duru Chikobava-Gen houseAll’. (2) When a modifier preceding its head has a base form ending in -i, that vowel often
deletes. (Base forms end in -i when the root is consonant-final; see §2.1.1.) Examples of this
deletion are art vit c’ana-k ‘about ten year-Nar’ (literally ‘one ten year’, compare art-i ‘one’, viti ‘ten’ in base form), obonal otax-əša ‘bathing room-All’ (‖ obonal-i), tecal c’ign-i ‘this.kind.of
book-Nom’ (‖ te-cal-i), skan muma ‘your father’ (‖ skani). These are instances of the more
general deletion of final vowels (§1.4.1).
Nouns that indicate material (for example, ‘stone’, ‘wood’), the whole to which a part
belongs, possession, and certain other relations are marked with the genitive case. Ordinarily a 
56
genitive modifier precedes the head and has the emphatic vowel -i (see §2.1.1.1): munep-iš-i
saxenc’əpo-ša ‘their-Gen-Emph country-All’, xenc’ipe-š-i čil-c-ə ‘governor-Gen-Emph wifeDat-Emph’. This emphatic vowel may, however, be absent: k’oč-iš guri ‘man-Gen heart’,
ǯoɣor-iš skua ‘dog-Gen child’. In a modifier preceding a head noun, the -š of the genitive case
marker may also weaken to -y or delete: zɣva-y ‖ zɣva p’iǯi ‘sea-Gen shore’ (‖ zɣva-š p’iǯi),
c’q’ar-i ʒga ‘water-[Gen] edge’. This was originally believed to be limited to compounds
(KIPSHIDZE 1914:020), but in fact occurs in other syntagmas; for example, šara p’i-c-y
‘road[Gen] edge-Dat-Emph’ (‖ šara-š-(i)), gotana borǯ-is-y ‘dawning[Gen] time-Dat-Emph’ (‖
gotana-š-(i)).
There is no general phonological rule deleting -š in word-final position; only the -š of the
genitive drops. Note that when š deletes completely, the form that remains is isomorphic with
the base form, and thus the phrase is structurally the same as the construction used for nouns of
measurement and title, as described above.
When adjectives follow the head noun, they are declined: cira skvam-k ‘girl/Base
beautiful-Nar’ ‖ cira-k skvam-k ‘girl-Nar beautiful-Nar’, cir-ep-i skvam-en-k ‘girl-Pl-Base
beautiful-Pl-Nar’ ‖ cira-en-k skvam-en-k ‘girl-Pl-Nar beautiful-Pl-Nar’. The adjective here
obligatorily shows both number and case; the nominal is obligatorily declined for number, but
optionally for case.
Genitive modifiers that follow the head are marked for case, but never for number; the
head may decline or not. Examples illustrate this: ʔude ǯa-š-i ‘house wood-Gen-Emph’, i.e.
‘house of wood, wooden house’, ʔude ǯa-š-iš-(i) ‘house wood-Gen-Gen-(Emph)’, i.e. ‘wooden
house’s’, beside ʔude-š-(i) ǯa-š-iš-(i) ‘house-Gen-(Emph) wood-Gen-Gen-(Emph)’ in the same
meaning, ʔude-p-iš ǯa-š-iš ‘house-Pl-Gen wood-Gen-Gen’. Note that in these examples the first
genitive marker relates the modifier, ‘wood’, to the head noun; the second indicates the case of
the entire noun phrase (or agrees with the head noun). Number marking is on the head noun
only, not on the genitive modifier. [Analysis of modifiers based on LOMTADZE 1954 and
KIZIRIA 1982:190-230; examples from the former, except as noted.]
Quantified nouns are usually in the singular form; for example, sumi skua ‘three
child[ren]’ (KLUGE 1916:81,16), breli k’oč-k ‘many man-Nar [men]’ (KIZIRIA 1982:194). 
57
Sometimes, however, the plural form is used with a quantifier; sumi ǯimalepi ‘three brothers’
(KHUBUA 1937:117,19).
A conjoined noun phrase is formed by joining nouns, with or without modifiers, using do
‘and’. In such a conjoined NP, the last conjunct must decline; others may be in the base form:
for example, dida do muma-k ‘mother and father-Nar’, irpeli ǯgiri do skvam-s-ia ‘everything
good and beautiful-Dat-Quot’, ɣureli do tel-iš ‘[the] dead and [the] living-Gen’, ʒɣabi do boš-o
‘girl and boy-Adv’. These groups have sometimes been considered compounds (URIDIA
1960:173), but TOPURIA (1959:298) has pointed out that the fact that the noun(s) before do can
also bear case and number seems to indicate that these are not compounds. For example, we find
čil-k do komoč-k ‘wife-Nar and husband-Nar’. KARTOZIA (1971) advances further arguments
against the view that these are compound nouns, including the fact that each conjunct may have
its own modifiers; for example, sumi cxenami k’oči do arti cira-k ‘three having.horses man and
one girl-Nar’, i.e. ‘three horsemen and one girl’.
While case may be marked only on the last conjunct, number must be marked
independently; for example, nger-ep-i do mela-t’ur-em-s ‘wolf-Pl-Base and fox-jackal-Pl-Dat’,
te osur-ep-i do ʒɣab-ep-iš ‘this woman-Pl-Base and girl-Pl-Gen’, i.e. ‘these women and girls’.
In the first of these two examples, mela-t’ur ‘fox-jackal’ is a true compound. In each example,
the first conjunct has the unmarked (base) plural form and the second conjunct is also marked for
plurality and bears the case ending appropriate to the context.
Sometimes nouns are conjoined without a conjunction; in such an instance they may or
may not all bear cases. An example without cases on the first nouns is given below.
(21) gorčkində t’q’a-s ger-i, t’ura, tunti-k
appear forest-Dat wolf-Base jackal.Base bear-Nar
‘A wolf, a jackal, [and] a bear appeared in the forest.’
[Analysis of conjoining and examples from KARTOZIA 1971.]
We can see that in Mingrelian it is possible to put a case marker at the end of an entire
noun phrase, whether that noun phrase consists of noun+noun, modifier+noun, or
noun+modifier. In every kind of noun phrase that has been studied from this point of view, it is
possible to have a single case marker adjoined to the entire NP. In this respect the Zan languages 
58
differ from the other Kartvelian languages. However, it remains possible to mark the head noun
(or an earlier conjunct) when it is non-final.
Relative clauses, which may also be part of the noun phrase, are discussed below in
§3.9.3.
3.2. Basic Clause Structure
3.2.1. Verbs and Their Arguments
Mingrelian is unlike any other Kartvelian language in that within each series all final
subjects are marked in one way. In Series I, III, and IV, all final subjects are marked with the
nominative case, and final direct and indirect objects with the dative. In Series II, all final
subjects are marked with the narrative case, final direct objects with the nominative, and final
indirect objects with the dative (KIZIRIA 1982: 81-101, 133-145; HARRIS 1985:55-58).
Examples below illustrate Series I and II with all verb classes except Class 4, which are dealt
with separately under “Inversion” later in this subsection; Series III is also discussed there.
Series I
Class 1 (22) muma arʒen-s cxen-s skua-s
father/Nom give-3.Sg.Subj horse-Dat child-Dat
‘The father is giving a horse to his child.’
(23) kiičinen-k-o skani skua-s? (Kip. 14, 8)
know-2.Sg.Subj-Ques your/Sg child-Dat-Emph
‘Will you recognize your son?’
Class 2 (24) iš t’erep-i ǯar-sə ɣuru (GUDAVA 1975:264, 8)
his enemies-Nom grief-Dat die/3.Sg.Subj
‘His enemies are dying with grief.’
(25) baɣana ʔude-s skidu
child/Nom house-Dat stay/3.Sg.Subj
‘The child is staying in the house.’
59
Class 3 (26) k’vinča č’vit’an-c (SAMUSHIA 1979:17,1)
siskin/Nom whistle-3.Sg.Subj
‘The siskin [a variety of finch] is whistling.’
(27) ate k’očep-i ǯgiro ibir-a diara-š obirem-s
these men-Nom well sing-3.Pl.Subj holiday-Gen songs-Dat
‘These men sing the holiday songs well.’
Series II
Class 1 (28) muma-k cxen-i kimeč-u skua-s
father-Nar horse-Nom give-3.Sg.Subj child-Dat
‘The father gave a horse to his child.’
(29) uk’ula-ši ǯima-k gegic’uɣ-u muma-s masuma sak’-i
last-Gen brother-Nar take-3.Sg.Subj father-Dat third sack-Nom
para (Kluge 82, 19)
gold/Nom
‘The youngest brother took the third sack of gold from the father.’
Class 2 (30) te amšvi k’oči do maškvita č’abuk’u-s gioskəd-ə kalaki-k (Khub. 241, 32)
this six man and seventh youth-Dat remain-3.Sg.Subj city-Nar
‘The city remained to these six men and (to) the seventh youth.’
(31) k’oč-k doɣur-u
man-Nar die-3.Sg.Subj
‘The man died’
Class 3 (32) dida do muma-k igar-es breli (Khub. 94, 3)
mother and father-Nar cry-3.Pl.Subj much
‘Mother and father cried a great deal.’
(33) ate uk’ulaši ǯima-k-ə ipirk-ə (Kluge 86, 11)
this last brother-Nar-Emph think-3.Sg.Subj
‘This youngest brother thought.’
Case marking is summarized in the table below, according to final grammatical relations.
60
Subject Direct Object Indirect Object
Series II Narrative Nominative Dative
other series Nominative Dative Dative
A verb may have either an indirect object, or a direct object, or both. Intransitives of both Class
2 and Class 3 may have final indirect objects, which are in the dative case, regardless of the
series.
Class 2 (34) čkəni ɣala misə ašaaskəd-ə.... (Kip. 73, 7)
our fortune/Nom who/Dat remain-3.Sg.Subj
‘[We do not know] to whom our fortune will remain.’
Class 3 (35) dida ubirs skua-s
mother/Nom 3.Obj/sing/3.Sg.Subj child-Dat
‘The mother sings to (her) child.’
Subjects (nominative-nominals in Series I and IV, narrative-nominals in Series II)
condition subject agreement markers (see §2.2.2). Both direct and indirect objects (nominativenominals in Series II and dative-nominals in Series I, II, and IV) condition object agreement
markers (see §2.2.2 and §2.2.6). This is indicated in the examples above. The agreement marker
a nominal conditions is thus independent of the case it bears.
Inversion
Inversion is a construction in which the initial (notional) subject becomes indirect object.
If there is an initial direct object, it becomes subject through a related process; if not, the verb is
given default marking--third person singular subject (see (52) below). In Series I, II, and IV, we
find inversion with Class 4 verbs, illustrated in (36-44). Since final subjects are marked with the
nominative in Series I and IV, the final (derived) subject bears this case in inversion as well.
Since final indirect objects are marked with the dative in Series I and IV, the final indirect object
(= initial subject) bears this case in inversion also. Initial subjects of most Class 4 verbs are
experiencers and possessors, initial objects their stimuli.
61
Series I (36) nugzar-s u-ʔor-s manana
Nugzar-Dat 3.Obj-love-3.Sg.Subj Manana/Nom
‘Nugzar loves Manana.’
(37) arti mapa-s ʔund osuri skua lexi (Kluge 80, 9)
one king-Dat have/3.Sg.Subj female child/Nom ill/Nom
‘A king had a sick daughter.’
(38) guram-s va-ǯer-s skani ambe
Guram-Dat Neg-believe-3.Sg.Subj your/Sg news/Nom
‘Guram does not believe your news.’
Since all subjects are marked with the narrative case in Series II, the final subject (= initial direct
object) bears this case in inversion. Indirect objects are marked with the dative in Series II, just
as in other series; thus the final indirect object (= initial subject) bears this case in inversion.
Series II (39) nugzar-s keʔorop-u manana-k
Nugzar-Dat love-3.Sg.Subj Manana-Nar
‘Nugzar fell in love with Manana.’
(40) namet’ank mu-m-ec’on-u ate ʒɣabi-k
much PV-1.Obj-like-3.Sg.Subj this girl-Nar
‘I liked this girl very much.’
(41) boš-is ʒalamk axiol-ə e ambee-kə (Kip. 23, 34)
boy-Dat very happy-3.Sg.Subj this news-Nar
‘The boy was very happy at this news.’
(42) osur-s mec’onu te boši-k (Khub. 1, 6)
woman-Dat 3.Obj/like/3.Subj this boy-Nar
‘The woman liked this boy.’
Since they have no final direct objects, all inversion constructions are final intransitives,
regardless of whether they are transitive or intransitive in initial structure.
Final subjects (nominative- or narrative-nominals) condition subject agreement, and final
indirect objects (dative-nominals) condition object agreement in all series, as illustrated above.
62
Relative potentials (see §2.2.7) are all Class 4 verbs and govern inversion in all series.
(43) k’o-s gešaanc’q’e sagan-i
man-Dat extract/Pot/I arrow-Nom10
‘The man can pull out the arrow.’
(44) k’o-s gešaanc’q’u sagan-k
man-Dat extract/Pot/II arrow-Nar
‘The man could (was able to) pull out the arrow.’
These are readily compared with the non-potential, which shows clearly the grammatical
relations and the relative difference between the inverted potential and the non-inverted nonpotential.
(45) k’oč-i gišanc’q’uns sagan-s
man-Nom extract/I arrow-Dat
‘The man is pulling out the arrow.’
(46) k’oč-k gišanc’q’u sagan-i (Examples (43-46) from URIDIA 1960:169.)
man-Nar extract/II arrow-Nom
‘The man pulled out the arrow.’
Inverted potentials exhibit the same kind of agreement as other inversion examples:
(47) m-arčkile musik’a
1.Obj-hear/3.Sg.Subj music/Nom
‘I hear the music.’
In Series III, inversion applies to all verbs of Classes 1 and 3. Their initial subjects (=
final indirect objects) are marked with the dative and condition object agreement. Their initial
direct objects (= final subjects), if any, are marked with the nominative case and condition
subject agreement. This is illustrated in the examples below.
63
Class 1 (48) muma-s cxen-i kime-u-čam-u skua-ša
father-Dat horse-Nom PV-3.Obj-give-3.Sg.Subj child-All
‘The father has evidently given a horse to his child.’
(49) si doyʔvilu (<do-g-iʔvil-u) ɣeǯ-i
you/Sg PV-2.Obj-kill-3.Sg.Subj pig-Nom
‘You have evidently killed a pig.’
Class 3 (50) baɣana-s u-laʔapin-u ezo-s
child-Dat 3.Obj-play-3.Sg.Subj yard-Dat
‘The child has evidently played in the yard.’
(51) baɣana-s nard-i u-laʔapin-u
child-Dat backgammon-Nom 3.Obj-play-3.Sg.Subj
‘The child has evidently played backgammon.’
(52) baɣana-s u-ngar-u
child-Dat 3.Obj-cry-3.Sg.Subj
‘The child has evidently cried.’
Class 2 verbs do not undergo inversion in Series III; their subjects remain subject, are
marked with the nominative case, and condition subject agreement.
Class 2 (53) baɣan-ep-i ʔude-s kudoskilade-na
child-Pl-Nom house-Dat stay-3.Pl.Subj
‘The children evidently stayed in the house.’
(54) k’oč-i doɣure
man-Nom die/3.Sg.Subj
‘Evidently the man died.’
(55) iripel-i art-o doč’vere (Kip. 14, 4)
everything-Nom one-Adv burn/3.Sg.Subj
‘Everything burned up as one.’
64
Class 4 verbs, which undergo inversion in all series, undergo inversion in Series III as
well, but only once. The example below is of a relative potential (from URIDIA 1960:169);
compare with (43-44) above.
Class 4 (56) k’o-s gešanc’q’umu sagan-i
man-Dat extract/Pot/III arrow-Nom
‘The man was evidently able to pull out the arrow.’
Thus, in Series III, verbs of Classes 1, 3, and 4 undergo inversion; verbs of Class 2 do
not. All final indirect objects, whether or not they are derived by inversion, are marked with the
dative case and condition object agreement (as in all other series). All final subjects, whether or
not they are derived, are marked with the nominative case (as in other series except Series II) and
condition subject agreement. [Analysis of inversion based upon KIZIRIA 1982:91,97-98, 142
and HARRIS 1985:271-286.]
If a verb that is inverted has an initial indirect object, inversion will displace that indirect
object. It is then retired and marked with the allative case; such an object cannot condition
agreement. This generalization applies both to the potential of a Class 1 verb (URIDIA
1960:169, SHEROZIA 1984:15) and to a Class 1 verb in Series III (see example (48) above).
(57) ve-m(i)-g-a-činə tiša (SHEROZIA 1984:15)
Neg-PV-2.Obj-give/Pot him/All
‘You cannot give it to him.’
(58) rezo-s vard-ep-(i) (k)-u-čukeb-u dida-ša
Rezo-Dat flower-Pl-Nom Aff-3.Obj-give-3.Sg.Subj mother-All
‘Rezo apparently gave flowers to (his) mother.’
Retired indirect objects occur in a number of other constructions that cannot be discussed here;
in each construction they are marked with the allative (HARRIS 1985:238-240).
3.2.2. Number Agreement
In Mingrelian, formally singular noun phrases generally condition singular verb
agreement and formally plural noun phrases generally condition plural verb agreement under the 
65
conditions stated in §2.2.2., but there are many exceptions. A collective noun that is formally
singular, such as k’ata ‘people’, may condition plural verb agreement.
(59) ...k’ata-k diič’ar-es (Kip. 4, 29)
people-Nar write-3.Pl.Subj
‘...The people wrote it.’
The quantifier ‘all’, formally singular, usually conditions plural verb agreement: arʒo-kə
kədiirule-esə ‘all-Nar fell asleep-3.Pl.Subj’.
A compound noun may condition a singular:
(60) e cira-še-ni k’itx-ə dida-muma-k (Kip. 46, 20)
this girl-Abl-about asked-3.Sg.Subj mother-father-Nar
‘(Her) parents asked about this girl.’
or plural verb form; the former is considered the norm.
(61) dida-muma-kə... ingar-esə (Kip. 35, 14)
mother-father-Nar cried-3.Pl.Subj
‘The parents cried.’
Numbers higher than one that constitute a subject, though formally singular, usually condition
plural agreement.
(62) sumi-xolo-k miindom-es ogurapu-ša ula (Kip. 7, 14)
three-even-Nar want-3.Pl.Subj study-All go/Nom
‘All three wanted to go to study.’
Quantified nominals condition either singular or plural agreement; both are illustrated in a single
sentence below.
(63) koʔope-n-ia sumi ǯima k’oči; žiri unčaši
be-3.Sg.Subj-Quot three brother man/Nom two elder
ǯima-l-ep-i dindari ʔope-na...(Kluge 86, 10)
brother-Ext-Pl-Nom rich be-3.Pl.Subj
‘There were three brothers; the two elder brothers were rich.’ 
66
In this example, the plural of the head noun, ǯima-l-ep-i ‘brothers’, has been used, and it is this
head with which the verb agrees (compare §3.1. above); however, a formally plural head with or
without a quantifier may condition a singular verb form:
(64) kumortu žiri boš-en-ki (Khub. 2, 14)
come/3.Sg.Subj two boy-Pl-Nar
‘Two boys came.’
(65) komort-ə sumar-em-kə (Kip. 92, 1)
come/3.Sg.Subj guest-Pl-Nar
‘The guests came.’
Inanimate plurals usually condition singular verb forms:
(66) didi ǯa-l-ep-i kočan-s (Kip. 5, 32)
big tree-Ext-Pl-Nom stand-3.Sg.Subj
‘The big trees stand.’
The form alepi kočana, with the verb form in the plural, is also possible. [Analysis of number
agreement based on URIDIA 1960:175-178 and KIZIRIA 1982:131.]
3.2.3. Adjuncts
3.2.3.1. Adjuncts Expressed With Oblique Cases Alone
In addition to marking objects, the dative expresses location (‘at’, ‘on’, ‘in’) and
duration.
(67) baɣan-ep-i ʔude-s skiduna
child-Pl-Nom house-Dat stay
‘The children are staying in/at the house.’
(68) gedoxodə te cxen-s (Khub. 67, 16)
sit this horse-Dat
‘He sat on this horse.’
67
(69) gat’q’uria kinaxunes sak’-is (Khub. 194,7)
deceiver/Nom put bag-Dat
‘They put the deceiver down in a bag.’
(70) ʒɣab-i teli dɣa-s mušens
girl-Nom whole day-Dat work
‘The girl works all day.’
The allative expresses the endpoint of motion or time; ‘to’, ‘onto’, ‘into’, ‘at’ (in the
sense of French chez), and ‘until’.
(71) diak’on-k midaraʔ xoǯ-ep-i ɣal-ša (Kluge 83, 18)
deacon-Nar drive ox-Pl-Nom creek-All
‘The deacon drove the oxen to the creek.’
(72) atenep-i kiguc’k’ares urem-iša (Khub. 205, 3)
these-Nom put cart-All
‘They put these onto the cart (for him).’
(73) boši-k... did-k’oč-uri rina-ʔopa-ša mišeelu (Kip. 24, 2-4)
boy-Nar big-man-Adj living-being-All enter
‘The boy entered into manhood.’
(74) boši-k minilu muši da-ša (Khub. 50, 31)
boy-Nar enter his sister-All
‘The boy entered his sister’s (place).’
One of the primary functions of the ablative is to express source, location from which
action proceeds.
(75) gileles raš-ep-iše (Khub. 28, 4)
come steed-Pl-Abl
‘They got down from the steeds.’
It can express the direction toward which action proceeds.
68
(76) saturko-še p’iǯ-i urtən-ia (Khub. 215, 26)
Turkey-Abl face-Nom turn-Quot
‘He had turned his face toward Turkey.’
In addition the ablative is used in the expression of comparison (see below, §3.7) and partitive.
(77) skua-l-ep-iše kaɣard-i namutin-s va učkədə (Kip. 7, 8)
child-Ext-Pl-Abl reading/writing-Nom no.one-Dat neg know
‘None of the children knew reading-and-writing.’
[Analysis of functions of the ablative based on LOMTADZE 1973.]
Instrument or means is expressed with the instrumental; ‘by’, ‘with’, ‘through’.
(78) do duukununa nošo-ti (Kluge 81, 9)
and cover branch-Inst
‘And they covered it with branches.’
The designative indicates the one for whom something is intended; ‘for’.
(79) ek iʔu irk’oč-išo saxiolo-k (Khub. 66, 14)
this/Nar be everyman-Des joy-Nar
‘This was for every man something to enjoy.’
(80) čkim-oti varti čili oʔopiruu, varti skua (Kip. 4, 27)
me-Des neither wife be nor child
‘For me there is neither wife nor child.’
The adverbial case expresses the role a person plays, often with verbs such as ‘works’, or
the result of a change of state; often it translates into English as ‘as’ (KIPSHIDZE 1914:0132-
0137).
(81) zɣva-ši p’araxod-is k’ap’it’an-o rdə k’oči (Khub. 42, 2)
sea-Gen transport-Dat captain-Adv be man/Nom
‘The man was a captain on a ship.’ 
69
(82) mapa-k kimeč tina mec’amale-s čil-o (Kluge 80, 16)
king-Nar give her/Nom doctor-Dat wife-Adv
‘The king gave her to the doctor as [his] wife.’
(83) ʒɣabi-k uʒirapu-o go-rtu (KIZIRIA 1982:126)
girl-Nar invisible-Adv PV-be
‘The girl became invisible.’
[Analysis of case functions based in part upon KIZIRIA 1982:145-225.]
3.2.3.2. Adjuncts Expressed With Postpositions
Postpositions include (c’)k’uma/(c’)k’ela/(c’)k’ala ‘with, at, beside’ (for example, ǯimac’k’uma ‘with brother’, see (102)), ni ‘about, concerning’ which governs the ablative (see (60)
above), and x ‘up to, as far as’, which takes the allative.
(84) ʔude-ša-x kimioč’irinu (KIZIRIA 1982:245)
house-All-to draw
‘They drew up to the house.’
Although there are few true postpositions in Mingrelian, some locational nouns can serve
in a similar function; for example, bžaiol gan-iše ‘east side-Abl’, i.e. ‘on the east side’, šara
p’icy ‘road[Gen] edge-Dat-Emph’ i.e. ‘beside the road’, doxore-š xolo-ša ‘house-Gen near-All’.
In Mingrelian, locational nouns differ from postpositions in that they can themselves bear a case
and have other properties of nouns.
(85) ǯa-š ǯin-s gitoxe (Khub. 130, 14)
tree-Gen base-Dat sit
‘S/he is sitting at the base of a tree.’
3.2.3.3. Adverbs
Adverbs ordinarily have the endings -i (usual in Series II, see (32) and (86)) or -s (usual
in Series I, see (100)).
70
(86) kidnaʔotes didi kua dini (Khub. 3, 8)
throw big rock/Nom inside
‘They threw a big rock inside.’
These are the endings also associated with the nominative and dative cases, respectively; thus,
adverbs usually bear the ending appropriate to the direct object.
Under certain circumstances, some adverbs have the ending -k, otherwise associated with
the narrative case; this occurs just in Series II, the series in which the (final) subject is marked
with the narrative case. According to KACHARAVA 1969, the -k occurs only with the adverbs
ʒalam- ‘very much, very’ (see (41) above), namet’an- ‘most of all’ (see (40)), and didi- ‘greatly’:
(87) ek didik axiolə (Khub. 193, 26)
this/Nar greatly pleased
‘S/he was greatly pleased at this.’
KACHARAVA (1969:505-506) likewise notes that this usage occurs only with affective verbs
and with two others, all inversion verbs.
3.2.4. Copula Sentences
The subject of the copula is, like other subjects, in the nominative case in all series
except II; in Series II it is in the narrative. Similarly, predicate nouns, adjectives, and participles
are in the nominative, except in Series II, where they are in the narrative.
Series I (88) skual-ep-i, ma ɣalieri k’oč-i vorek (Kluge 81, 18)
child-Pl-Nom I/Nom rich man-Nom I/be
‘Children, I am a rich man.’
 (89) inepi iro sac’q’al-i rdu (Kip. 3, 23)
they/Nom always pitiable-Nom he/be
‘They were always pitiable.’
Series II (90) tina-k ok’o iʔuas tiši komonǯ-k (Khub. 35, 2)
that-Nar must he/be that/Gen husband-Nar
‘That one must be her husband.’ 
71
[Analysis of Series II copula based on URIDIA 1960:171.]
In the present screeve the copula ore ‘s/he is’ may be shortened to -re or -e and cliticized
to another constituent.
(91) čkin ɣalu cit’ čxom-ep-iti-e epša (LOMTADZE 1954:215)
our stream hatchling fish-Pl-Inst-it/be full
‘Our stream is full of hatchling fish’
The copula is a suppletive and irregular verb; it nevertheless meets the morphological
definition of a Class 2 verb and has the syntactic and semantic properties of that class.
3.2.5. Analytic Constructions
In constructions making use of auxiliary verbs, the case marking, agreement, and syntax
are governed by the auxiliary. The analytic passive is formed with a past passive participle and
the copula and has the characteristics described in §3.2.4. The participle acts as the predicate
nominal. Below is an example in the aorist, a Series II screeve, showing that the subject and
participle are both in the narrative case, as described for the copula in the preceding subsection.
(92) surati-k xant’ir-k iʔuu (KIZIRIA 1982:113)
picture-Nar painted-Nar it/be
‘The picture got painted.’
There is an analytic perfect, which for Class 1 verbs is formed with the verb ‘have’ and a
past passive participle. ‘Have’ is an inversion verb, and its initial subject becomes an indirect
object, is marked with the dative, and conditions object agreement. Its initial object becomes
subject, is marked with the subject case appropriate to the series, and conditions subject
agreement.
(93) si ʔviliri g-apə te-š minǯe k’oč-i-a (Khub. 92, 16)
you/Dat killed 2.Obj-have/3.Sg.Subj this.one-Gen master man-Nom-Quot
‘You have killed his master.’
(94) te boš-is apə turme gagebuli (Khub. 88, 32)
this boy-Dat 3.Obj/have/3.Sg.Subj apparently understood
‘This boy has apparently understood it.’ 
72
[Analysis of analytic constructions based in part on LOMTATIDZE 1963, KIZIRIA 1982:113,
125.] Note that there are other constructions which are derived historically from an auxiliary
verb in an analytic construction but which have been reanalyzed; these are not considered
analytic constructions here.
3.3. Reciprocals
Reciprocals can be expressed analytically using one of the two reciprocal pronouns (see
§2.1.3.8).
(95) teši raš-ep-i xolo artian-c očxup’una (Khub. 184, 12)
this/Gen steed-Pl-Nom even each.other-Dat they/fight
‘Even their steeds fought each other.’
(96) oxvarədat arti-mažia-s (Kip. 79, 7)
you/help one-other-Dat
‘You should help one another.’
3.4. Question Formation
Mingrelian makes use of a question enclitic, -o to form simple yes/no questions; the host
is generally the finite verb form, as in these examples.
(97) cxen-(i) kimeči-o skua-s?
horse-Nom you/give/it/him-Ques child-Dat
‘Did you give a horse to (your) child?’
(98) laʔapenk-o ezo-s?
you/play-Ques yard-Dat
‘Are you playing in the yard?’
In content questions, the Q-word comes immediately before the verb.
(99) si mu gic’uu ɣoront-kə? (Kluge 89, 14)
you/Dat what/Nom he/say/it/you God-Nar
‘What did God say to you?’
73
The question word mušeni ‘why’ is an exception to this generalization; it usually comes at the
beginning of its clause.
(100) mušeni čkimi ǯimalepi brel-cə va-mušena...? (Kluge 87, 8)
why my brothers much-Dat Neg-they/work
‘Why do my brothers not work much...?’
If the Q-word is part of a noun phrase, it is the entire noun phrase that precedes the verb:
(101) mu ambe-e (Kluge 89, 12)
what news/Nom-it/be
‘What news is there?’
(102) mu sakəme giɣu ɣoronti-c’k’əma? (Kluge 86, 16)
what business you/have/it God-with
‘What business do you have with God?’
[Analysis of questions based on Harris 1982.]
Clefted questions are described in §3.9.4.
3.5. Imperative
Imperatives have unexpressed second person subjects and use the forms of the aorist
screeve (§2.2.5). This screeve is in Series II, and imperatives have the basic clause structure
described above for Series II.
(103) ma komuči te par-ep-i (Kluge 82, 7)
me/Dat you/give/it/me this gold-Pl-Nom
‘Give me this gold!’
(104) milaraʔi xoǯ-ep-i ɣal-ša (Kluge 83, 17)
you/drive/it ox-Pl-Nom brook-All
‘Drive the oxen to the brook!’
3.6. Negation
Clausal negation is expressed with the negative marker, va(r).
74
(105) oxvame šors va-rd (Kluge 83, 11)
church/Nom far Neg-be
‘The church was not far.’
The negative is generally proclitic to the verb (see note 4) and may bear stress; for example,
vámašu ‘I could not drink it’ (example from GUDAVA 1969:109). (In examples cited in the
present article, va(r) is written as a separate word when the source text has it this way.)
In the following example, the negative occurs as a separate word, with the enclitic -ti
‘too, also’, negating a particular constituent.
(106) mara var-ti te ǯma-sə daaguru kaɣardi-k (Kluge 82, 17)
but Neg-too this brother-Dat learn/Pot/Aor reading/writing-Nar
‘But this brother could not learn reading-and-writing either.’
In addition, vart(i) functions in pairs as ‘neither...nor’, as in (80).
A constituent may be negated with a negative pronoun, mita ‘no one’ or muta ‘nothing’;
when a negative pronoun is used, negative va(r) does not occur (TOPURIA 1923:103,
MARTIROSOVI 1964:387).
(107) ma muta p’unsən (Khub. 221, 37)
I/Dat nothing/Nom I/have/it
‘I have nothing.’
As an alternative to this, a non-specific indefinite pronoun may be used with proclitic va(r).
(108) mitin’ va-ardə (TOPURIA 1923:103)
someone/Nom Neg-be
‘There wasn’t anyone.’
(109) mitin-cə ve mečə (Kip. 93, 13)
someone-Dat Neg give
‘S/he did not give it to anyone.’ 
75
3.7. Comparative Construction
Comparison is expressed analytically; the object of comparison may be in the ablative
case, as in the following examples.
(110) tekine art-iše gverdi met’i vorek (Khub. 29, 5)
there one-Abl half more I/be
‘There I am half more than one’, ‘I am more than one by half.’
(111) muhambi-k iʔuu muma-še met’i uǯguš-i do umosi gavlenil-k (Khub. 26, 27)
Muhambi-Nar he/be father-Abl more good-Base and more influential-Nar
‘Muhambi became better than his father and more influential.’
Alternatively the object of comparison may be in the genitive:
(112) č’uman-iš uǯguš geɣan-i-e (Khub. 113, 24)
tomorrow-Gen good day.after.tomorrow-Nom-it/be
‘The day-after-tomorrow is better than tomorrow.’
In each example the word order is
OBJECT OF COMPARISON--COMPARATIVE ADJECTIVE.
3.8. Clause Coordination
Clauses may be joined with the conjunctions do ‘and’ or mara ‘but’.
(113) mečxome-s šeecod e čxom-k do kidnaxunu c’q’ar-s koni (Kluge 79, 43)
fisherman-Dat pity this fish-Nar and put .away water-Dat back
‘The fisherman pitied this fish, and he put it back in the water.’
(114) gilart breli, mara čxom-k va-a-č’opu (Kluge 79, 41)
go much but fish-Nar Neg-Pot-catch
‘He went a lot, but he could not catch a fish.’
However, clauses may also be joined without a conjunction:
(115) diak’on-k molart ʔude-ša daač’k pirk-i (Kluge 83, 9)
deacon-Nar go house-All begin thinking-Nom
‘The deacon went home, [and] he began to think.’
76
3.9. Subordination
There are two general subordinators, namuda and ni ‘that’, which can occur in
subordinate clauses of all major types. The complementizer namuda introduces a subordinate
clause, and ni closes a subordinate clause; usually only one of the two occurs. ni is generally
enclitic to the verb, which itself is usually in clause-final position; there are a few examples, such
as (146), with ni enclitic to a different constituent in clause-final position.
All three major types of subordinate clause can either precede or follow the matrix
clause. According to ABESADZE (1963:14-15), namuda is used in dependent clauses that
follow the matrix, while ni is used in those that precede or are embedded in the main clause.
Adverbial clauses using ni may occur in any position relative to the matrix (see §3.9.4 for more
particulars).
In subsection §3.9.1 sentential subjects and objects are described, in §3.9.2 reported
speech, in §3.9.3 relative clauses, with clefts in §3.9.4, and adverbial clauses in §3.9.5.
3.9.1. Clauses as Subject or Direct Object
The complementizer namuda may be used to initiate a sentential subject, as in (116), or
sentential direct object, as in (117), following the matrix clause:
(116) xolo umoso gasak’viro daaskides ti-k, namda xečo-ši
still more surprising remain that-Nar Comp Khecho-Gen
guda-s antasi puti-ši umosi ɣvin-k kenant’irə (Kip. 20, 28)
wineskin-Dat thousand pood [a measure] more wine-Nar fit
‘It remained still more surprising, that more than a thousand poods of wine fit into
Khecho’s wineskin.’
(117) meučines, namuda muši osuriskua ate mapa-ši skua-s
announce Comp his daughter/Nom this king-Gen child-Dat
čilo kimečasə ni (Kip. 48, 19)
wife-Adv give Comp
‘They announced that he would give his daughter to the king’s son as his wife.’
Enclitic ni can also be used in this function:
77
(118) kuuc’i, mortas-i (ABESADZE 1965:249)
you/say come-Comp
‘Say that s/he should come.’
Here the complementizer has been reduced to -i.
Clause subordination can be marked by a subjunctive or conditional verb form, as in
examples above and gaasxadas ‘explain’ in (119).
(119) xenc’əpe-sə va ak’o, mu-kə aɣolə ni, gaacxadas-ie (Kip. 76, 13)
governor-Dat Neg want what-Nar come.over Comp explain/Sbjv-Quot
‘The governor does not want to explain what came over him.’
The subjunctive or conditional is used to mark the dependent clause when the matrix clause
contains a verb such as ok’o ‘want’, pikrens ‘thinks’, or gignoč’q’vidu ‘decided’. In this
situation, the screeve of the matrix verb determines which subjunctive will be used, according to
the following table (KIZIRIA 1982:127-128):
Verb of Matrix Clause Verb of Dependent Clause
present subjunctive II
imperfect conditional II
aorist subjunctive II or conditional II
3.9.2. Reported Speech
Reported speech in Mingrelian generally uses the same pronouns and verb tenses as
direct speech; reported speech differs from direct speech in that the former is usually marked by
a quotative marker. The form -ia, -a marks speech by a third person, while -mak marks speech
by the first person, and -šo speech by the second person of the speech event. These may be
enclitic to any one of a variety of hosts (see also (147)) in a variety of positions (see ((63)).
(120) ates dənačina apun-ia čkinda (Khub. 72, 26)
he/Dat instructed have-Quot us-All
‘“He has instructed us,” he said.’
78
(121) zɣva-ša gegnvoʔot(i)-mak (Khub. 94, 33)
sea-All throw-Quot
‘“I threw it into the sea,” I said.’
The verb ‘say’ is used here to translate the quotative, though no such verb appears overtly in
these sentences; only the quotative marker suggests speech and indicates the person of the
speaker. Often, however, reported speech is a subordinate clause, the object of an overt verb
‘say’. (In examples outside this section, the quotative is glossed, but not translated.)
3.9.3. Relative Clauses
Typologically Mingrelian permits a variety of relative clauses. The first major type is
formed with the relative pronouns mi-ti ‘who’, mu-ti ‘what’, namu(-ti) ‘which’, and muzma-ti ‘as
many, as much’ (see §2.1.3.5 on the morphology). Relative clauses of this type may follow or
precede the head noun.
(122) tinepiši ʔude-s xvalee ate cira rdə, namuti ʒiʒeet kədeek’inə (Kip. 50, 13)
their house-Dat alone this girl be/I which/Nom wetnurse bring/II
‘In their house was only the girl, whom he had brought as wetnurse.’
(123) mu-ti komic’uu č’k’veri k’oč-k, geemirtə iripel-k (Kip. 26, 16)
what/Nom-Rel say/II wise man-Nar fulfill/II everything-Nar
‘Everything which the wise man told me came true.’
Headless relatives are formed with a relative pronoun; like its headed counterpart, the
headless relative clause may follow or precede the matrix.
(124) gak’ošaq’aruu, mu-ti tok’epi koʒədə i keʔana-sə11 (Kip. 65, 3)
gather what/Nom-Rel ropes/Nom lie that country-Dat
‘He gathered what ropes were in that country.’
(125) mi-t dəmoguruans-ni, ate sak’i para-s kuvačukenk (Kluge 82, 6)
who/Nom-Rel teach/I-Comp this bag-Base gold-Dat give/I
‘I will give this sack of gold to whoever teaches me [reading and writing].
Examples such as (126) are similar to headless relatives, but have a resumptive pronoun which
may be viewed as the head (compare (126) to (125)).
79
(126) mi-t daaskilduans čkimi osuri skua-s-ni,
who/Nom-Rel save/I my female child-Dat-Comp
ti-s čkimi osuri skuas čil-o kek’uxunuank (Kluge 80, 10)
that.one-Dat wife-Adv give/I
‘I will give my daughter as wife to whoever saves her.’
In relative clauses formed with a pronoun, the pronoun generally stands in initial position
in its clause, though in the following example it is clause-medial.
(127) si mi-ti gəgač’q’oruu ni, tis ma goblaxənk-ia (Kip. 51, 32)
you/Dat who/Nom-Rel angry/I Comp him/Dat I/Nom beat/I-Quot
‘I will beat up that one who is angry with you.’
According to ABESADZE (1965:235, 237), the pronoun must occur before the predicate of its
clause. The complementizer ni may appear in relative clauses in addition to the relative pronoun,
as in (125-127), or be absent, as in other examples above.
Regarding so-called positions relativizable, the pronouns namu-ti ‘which’, mi-ti ‘who’,
and mu-ti ‘which’ can each replace nominals in the relations subject (transitive or intransitive),
direct object, or indirect object. (This generalization is stated with regard to surface grammatical
relations and is supported by textual examples of each pronoun cited by ABESADZE 1965.)
Regarding oblique relations, the individual pronouns have not been studied for each individual
relation; however, ABESADZE (1965:231-237) has provided a variety of textual examples
including forms of namuti in the genitive, allative, and ablative cases, and with the postposition
c’k’əma ‘with’, and forms of miti in the genitive. A sampling of examples follows:
(128) tis, namu-še-ti sinatle iʒiredu-ni (Khub. 7, 20)
that/Dat which-Abl-Rel light/Nom show/I-Comp
‘that [residence], from which a light showed’
(129) ʒɣabi, (namu)-c’k’əma koǯanudə sumi dɣa do sumi ser-s (Khub. 134, 12)
girl/Nom which-with lie/I three day and three night-Dat
‘the girl, with whom he lay for three days and three nights’ 
80
(130) sadgəmi, namu-ši k’əla musu uɣudu (Kip. 63, 3)
residence which-Gen key/Nom he/Dat have/I/Inv
a residence, of (to) which he had the key’
The second major type of relative clause is formed instead by omitting the relativized
noun and marking the clause with the subordinator ni ‘that’; these are GAPPED relatives. Such
clauses may follow the head noun, as in (131).
(131) uc’uu ti k’oč-k, mdinare-ši c’q’ar-s šundu ni (ABESADZE 1965:247)
say/II that man-Nar river-Gen water-Dat drink/I Comp
‘The man that was drinking river water said....’
When the relative clause precedes the head, the head is often a pronoun.
(132) uk’uli uc’uu, ešmak’-išot ragadaandu ni, ti-k (Kip. 4, 4)
later say/II devil-Des talk Comp he-Nar
‘Later that one that was talking to the devil said....’
In relatives of both major types, the case of the head is generally determined by its
grammatical relation within its clause and by the series to which the verb of its clause belongs,
while the case of the relative pronoun (if one occurs) is determined by the same factors within its
clause. However, there are examples in which the head noun bears the same case as namuti
‘which-Rel’, as governed by the relative clause; in each such example, a resumptive pronoun
follows the relative clause, bearing the case determined by the matrix clause. In (133) the case
governed for osur- ‘woman’ is narrative, since it is subject of a verb in Series II; however, the
noun is nominative, as is namuti ‘which’, which immediately follows it.
(133) osur-i, namu-ti iriato ɣvarandu do tvalundu,
woman-Nom which/Nom-Rel always wail/I and lament/I
tik xolo ʒica dič’q’u (ABESADZE 1965:233)
she/Nar even laugh/Nom begin/II
‘The woman that was ceaselessly wailing and lamenting, she even began to laugh.’
Such resumptive pronouns are not limited to examples where the case of the head noun is
determined by the relative clause.
81
(134) k’oč-kə, namu-ti c’q’ar-cə oskəruandə, tik uc’uu (Kip. 15, 14)
man-Nar which/Nom-Rel water-Dat dry/I he/Nar say/II
‘The man who was drying up the water said....’
There are likewise examples of the head noun bearing the case determined by the relative clause
in gapped relatives. In the following example, the head noun is repeated after the subordinate
clause, bearing the case determined by its own clause.
(135) xam-i, naʔvila do goxirili k’oč-iši kora-s
knife-Nom killed and robbed man-Gen stomach-Dat
koʒiresə ni, e xam-kə te boš-iši-k iʔuu (Kip. 24, 26)
see/II Comp this knife-Nar this boy-Gen-Nar be/II
‘The knife which they saw in the stomach of the murdered and robbed man became this
boy’s knife.’
3.9.4. Clefts
Content questions are frequently expressed with a special construction in Mingrelian
(KIPSHIDZE 1914:0140-0141, ABESADZE 1965:249).
(136) so-ša re, meurkə ni? (Kip. 7, 18)
where-All it/be you/go Comp
‘Where is it that you are going?’
(137) mu ore, sak’-it megiɣu ni? (Kip. 8, 11)
what/Nom it/be sack-Inst you/take/it Comp
‘What is it that you are taking with (in) the sack?’
From the point of view of language universals, these are focus clefts. The matrix clause contains
the question word and the copula; the dependent clause, marked with the clause-final
subordinator ni ‘that’ contains the remaining constituents. The dependent clause of the cleft
construction is formally the same as a gapped relative (§3.9.3).
A peculiarity of this construction in Mingrelian is that the case of the Q-word is not
governed by the copula, as it at first appears in the examples above; rather, the case of the Qword is governed by the verb of the dependent clause, as illustrated below.
82
(138) mu-su re, č’aruns ni?
what-Dat it/be he/write/it Comp
‘What is it that he is writing?’
In this example the question word is in the dative, the case governed by c‘aruns (in this Series I
form) for its direct object; subjects and predicate nominals of the copula do not occur in the
dative (see §3.2.4). [Analysis of clefts based on HARRIS (1994).]
3.9.5. Adverbial Clauses
A wide variety of adverbial clauses may be marked with the clause-final subordinator ni;
meaning differences among them are indicated in part by the correlate used in the main clause.
ABESADZE (1965:248) lists the following types of ni adverbial, each with its own correlate:
Manner taši ‘this way’, teši ‘that way’
Cause tišeni ‘because of that’, tešeni ‘because of this’
Purpose tišeni ‘because of that’, tešeni ‘because of this’
Place tek ‘there’, tak ‘here’, teure ‘thither’, taure’hither’
Time timc’k’əma, timc’k’ala ‘then’, xate ‘then immediately’ uk’uli ‘later’, etc.
Conditional clauses with ni have no correlate, and adverbials of cause may also occur without a
correlate. (139) illustrates a correlate in a manner adverbial, and (140) the absence of one in an
adverbial of cause. (The verb of the dependent clause in (139) is finite, though it is translated
with a nonfinite form in English.)
(139) v-eɣu mutuni e k’oč-kə-ni, teši molartu ʔud-ša (Khub. 25, 8)
Neg-take something this man-Nar-Comp thatway come house-All
‘This man came home, having taken nothing.’
83
(140) skani samartal-s iri k’oč-i ockvansə ni, ma-ti skani k’ar-iša
your justice-Dat every man-Nom praise Comp I-too your door-All
kəmoprti (Kip. 44, 22)
come
‘Because everyone praises your justice, I too have come to your door.’
It is characteristic of adverbials of time formed with ni that they seldom have correlates, and that
the dependent clause usually precedes the matrix.
(141) mioǯin-ni, koʒir xoǯ-ep-i.... (Kluge 84, 2)
look-Comp see ox-PL-Nom
‘When he looked, he saw the oxen....’
Purpose adverbials in ni differ from cause adverbials, which share the same correlates, in that
purpose adverbials mostly follow the main clause and use a subjunctive or conditional form in
the dependent clause.
(142) ma taki tišeni moprti, lazut’i komiʔidirədək’o ni (Kip. 2, 26)
I here becausethat come corn buy Comp
‘I came here so that I might buy corn.’
The complementizer namuda can also combine with correlates to form adverbials:
(143) ina teši gak’virebuli rdə, namuda oč‘k’omal-k va ač’k’omə (Kip. 22, 7)
s/he thatway surprised be Comp food-Nar Neg eat/Pot
‘He was so surprised that he could not eat food.’
The complementizers namuda and ni are occasionally used in the same dependent clause.
Conditional clauses may be formed with da ‘if’, which occurs in clause-final position.
(144) skua koʔundu-a da, gverdo ɣureli iʔuapudu-a (Khub. 21, 6)
child/Nom have-Quot if half dead be-Quot
‘If he had a child, he would be half dead.’
Such clauses usually precede the main clause, but may follow or be embedded within the matrix.
The question marker, o, can be used to mark a dependent clause in the meaning ‘when, as
soon as’. Such clauses precede the main clause, and the question marker itself is final in its
clause (ABESADZE 1963:18).
84
(145) boši-k ešelə do gioǯinu-o, kičinu ʒɣab-i (Khub. 34, 24)
boy-Nar go and look-Ques know girl-Nom
‘As soon as the boy went up and looked, he recognized the girl.’
A variety of adverbial clauses can also be formed with a relative adverb, with or without
a correlate, and with or without ni. Adverbs of this type include sondaro ‘until, before’, so(ti)
‘where’, sole ‘whither’; the correlates are generally the same as those listed above.
(146) mužansit kumort mapa-ša-ni (Kluge 80, 12)
when come king-All-Comp
‘When he came to the king....’
(147) si so dinəkə ni, tekə bdinəkə ma-ti-a (Kip. 63, 16)
you where lose Comp there lose I-too-Quot
‘Where you get lost, I will get lost (there) too.’
In (146) the complementizer ni is enclitic to a constituent other than the verb. Although
this is frequent in adverbial clauses, it is not common in other clause types. [Analysis of
subordination based in part on ABESADZE 1963, 1965; many examples are also from those
sources.]
